Naomi Siddall vs Australia

We caught up with the 33-year-old ahead of Saturday's Superleague climax to find out her expectations for Mavericks' toughest match yet. Mavericks are now in their third consecutive Grand Final – well done! How are you preparing for the final this time round, compared with the past two years? Thank-you! To be honest, its pretty much ‘business as usual' this year. We've been in sudden death play-offs for the past 2 weekends and the final is another ‘must win' game. This year, we're preparing to play against Loughborough rather than Bath but we've been focusing mainly on our own game rather than the opposition anyway. Has your training schedule altered ahead of the final?

A Mavericks huddle

Personal training and fitness sessions have tapered much more as we've entered the play-offs – the focus has been on making sure we're fully recovered for each match rather than training right through. In team training, there are always things we need to work on and improve so that carries on in much the same way, although now we are just fine-tuning stuff rather than making any massive changes. What are you expecting from Loughborough in the final? What do you think will be your biggest challenge as a team and individually?

Lining up in England uniform and hearing the national anthem playing is a feeling like no other.

Loughborough have been tough opposition since the competition started and we've always had close matches with them, particularly in play-off situations when we've needed to play extra-time in the past to get the result. This year, their team has improved yet again and the last time we played them, we lost by two. We were disappointed with how many mistakes we made in that game so are definitely looking to put out a better performance this weekend but we're under no illusions that Loughborough will be firing on all cylinders too! On court, I'll be lining up against Lightning's powerful attacking combination. Olivia Murphy, Alex Wood and Jo Harten are all players I know well – I've been playing with Olivia and Alex for years and Jo played for Mavericks last year so we all know each other's games inside out.

They'll be looking to exploit my weaknesses and I'll be hoping I can make them change their game enough to put them on the back foot and come out with some good interceptions. Thankfully, I've got some good defenders in front of me to help out and make it a real team effort! What do you think has made the difference this year, compared with Mavericks' campaigns in the past two seasons? At the moment, we can't say whether we've been more successful this year than the previous two or not – we'll have to wait for the result on Saturday for that!

This year has been a completely different competition from the previous two in lots of ways. Mavericks actually had their worst league campaign this year – we'd always been more comfortably through to the play-offs earlier in the season in the past. You could almost look at this year's competition as two separate ones: the first half of the season while the England Team was away at the World Championships and then from just after half way when our England team mates returned and we had also recruited three other new players, Clare Elsley, Monique Wood and Michelle Hall. The squad we have now has only been together in full since the beginning of February. It's taken us a while to find the right combinations but now we're coming into form just in time. The mixed results we had earlier in the season meant we really had to fight hard in the last few rounds of the league and that's been followed by two tough play-off games. The advantage to that is that we know we can fight hard for the results we need when it counts and it's cemented our new combinations by putting them under real pressure. That can only be good preparation for a final.

Who has been your toughest opponent (player and team) so far in the competition? Loughborough are the team we still have to beat this year – they've beaten us both times we've played. Olivia Murphy is the toughest opponent I face too, either marking her when I'm at WD or when she is feeding into the circle to shooters I am marking. Her feeding is incredibly accurate and she has such an innate understanding of what space the ball needs to be put in it makes my job very difficult. What has been the highlight of your netballing career so far?