On Wednesday afternoon in Kyoto, Japan, Nintendo Co. Ltd. allegedly held a private conference at the Rihga Royal Hotel, where company leaders spoke to third-party publishing partners about a new service in the works for Wii owners. Called 'Wii Expand,' the addition, which utilizes the recently-released Wii System Menu 4.0's new SD card compatibility, enables players to download game expansions, modifications and updates. Insiders who attended the exclusive event said that Wii Expand would launch globally later this year, but could not provide an exact date.

Given that Nintendo's console has lagged behind competitors with regard to downloadable content, we figured it was just a matter of time before a solution came along

Much more surprising is the demo the publisher showcased presumably as a proof of concept for the service: an ultra-violent update to its hit Wii fighter, now appropriately dubbed Super Smash Bros. Brawl X: Extreme. The moniker seems to be a play on the game's original Japanese name of Dairantou Smash Bros. X -- now, though, the 'X' is stained with blood. Insiders explained that via a content download through the Expand service, Wii owners would be able to save the expansion to SD card and could then choose to play the so-called 'Extreme' version of the game upon next booting Brawl.

Sources described several scenes from Nintendo's presentation, all of them depicting gory additions to the fighter. In one such bout, Link of Zelda fame supposedly decapitated Nintendo's plumber. Skeptical, we asked our contacts to provide us with documented proof, either of the event or of the revelations made within, and they did us one better. As a result, IGN can today present the first look at the new Super Smash Bros. Brawl X: Extreme via bootlegged shaky-cam footage from the event. It's not of the best quality, but it's better than you'll find anywhere else.

See the first footage of Smash Bros. Brawl's adult upgrade here.

In the footage provided to us, viewers will hear what we can only presume is a Nintendo spokesperson speaking about the Wii Expand service and of the Smash Bros. Brawl X: Extreme downloadable content. She refers to the add-on as an 'Extreme Mode' (our own sources assert the actual title is Smash Bros. Brawl X: Extreme) and adds,  <quote> "The add-on will be aimed at adult gamers and we think this mode will be very surprising for them." </quote> 

The Wii Expand service will allegedly be an addendum to the Wii Shop Channel. Our sources allege that developers who create significant updates for their games will be encouraged to adhere to a pricing plan that ranges between 500 and 2,000 Wii Points depending on the scope of the content offered. Exactly how the different prices per expansion will break down beyond that is not yet known and Nintendo officials did not reveal how much they would charge for the 'Extreme' addition when it becomes available. According to one insider we spoke with, Nintendo has set a maximum file size restriction of 170MBs for Expand service content.

Nintendo of America spokespersons could not be reached before we published today's news. As always, the information contained within today's article should be considered rumor until officially confirmed by the publisher. Stay tuned to IGN for more information on the Wii Expand service and the Super Smash Bros. Brawl X: Extreme expansion because you can bet we'll have more to come in the near future.
