A DRUGS courier from Bolton is today starting a six-year jail term after he admitted being part of a multi-million pound cartel which flooded the streets of Scotland with narcotics.

Qamaruddin Munshi, aged 28, was given a 1 series BMW by gang boss Christopher Pimblett, which he used on at least 15 occasions to transport kilos of heroin and other drugs to Glasgow.

Munshi, of Avondale Street, Brownlow Fold, who worked as a postman in Greater Manchester by day, was caught red-handed by officers from Merseyside Police's drugs unit with a kilo of heroin in his car last April.

He pleaded guilty to conspiracy to supply drugs and was one of 17 people to be sentenced at Liverpool Crown Court yesterday.

The gang was arrested on April 17, 2007, in a series of drugs raids following an 18-month covert investigation into drugs distribution across the country, but primarily between Merseyside and Strathclyde.

The main distribution centre for the drug supply was concentrated in St Helens, where gang leader Pimblett pulled the strings of his empire.

Pimblett, who sent around £40,000 worth of drugs to Glasgow each week for two years, was jailed for 12 years yesterday.

He bought Munshi, who was his main courier, the BMW which he used to carry out his drug runs.

Detective Inspector Andy Black, who led the investigation, said:  <quote> "We were aware at a very early stage of Munshi's role, but it took us a while to identify him.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "He was an integral part of a sophisticated drug dealing network and it was only a matter of time before we caught up with him." </quote> 

Munshi was also asked to test the purity of drugs on behalf of Pimblett, using a testing agent.

 <quote> "This obviously requires a certain level of sophistication," </quote>  said Det Insp Black.

During the investigation almost 136kgs of cocaine, 1kg of heroin, 12,670 MDMA tablets, 12 kgs of amphetamine, 40.5kgs of cannabis, and 54 kgs of a mixing agent with an estimated street value of £1millon were seized along with two firearms and ammunition.

In addition to this, cash in excess of £750,000 in English and Scottish bank notes was seized.

Liverpool Crown Court heard that the Pimblett, his wife Sharon and 15 other men, were arrested following the operation, codenamed Operation Subito.

Jailing the gang Judge Brian Lewis said that the case involved  <quote> "wholesale supply on a large scale between April, 2005 and April, 2007." </quote> 

All the defendants were involved for at least some of the time in the plot supplying drugs from St Helens to Glasgow and southern Scotland.

Cash was intercepted by police and telephone probes secretly planted at Pimblett's home recorded scores of conversations about drug deals and cash.

After his arrest £350,000 in cash was found at his home.

The other 15 people were jailed for a total of almost 100 years for their part in the conspiracy.

The mastermind of the Scottish end, Fergus Smith, aged 26, also admitted the conspiracy charge and was sentenced to five years.