It is 105 years since the Neapolitan tenor Enrico Caruso arrived at a Milanese hotel - the one in which Verdi had died the previous year - to make the first indisputably classic classical record.

More than a century later, the performances Caruso committed to disc in 1902 remain benchmarks. Luciano Pavarotti has called them the standard by which he and all subsequent tenors must measure themselves.

But for how much longer will this be true? A century on, fewer and fewer classical records are being made. Twenty years ago, the giant companies that dominated the classical recording industry were turning out about 700 releases a year. Today, just two are in the business. Production is down to about 100 new discs a year - many in the crossover repertoire that purists would not accept as  <quote> "classical" </quote>  at all - and falling. If some new Caruso were to arise, his 22nd-century successors might struggle to discover how he sounded.

Over the past decade or so, this once vibrant and profitable production line - which shaped the performance styles of thousands of 20th-century musicians and the knowledge of millions of listeners - has been quietly sliding into oblivion. For all but a handful of stars, the days of the recording contract disappeared in the 1990s. The great companies have since merged, closed or abandoned classical altogether.

Classical records might have gone the way of milk bottles and coal fires had it not been for the attentiveness of the American cultural critic Norman Lebrecht, who has made it his life's work to demystify the classical music business. In a new book, Maestros, Masterpieces and Madness, Lebrecht pronounces the death of the classical recording industry. If that is true, what went wrong? And what, in the broader sense, has been lost, for musicians and for music lovers? If there is to be no more classical recording in the digital age, how do classical music and its public adjust?

The only dispute about classical recording is whether it is dying or dead. The glut that by the end of the 20th century had generated at least 276 recordings of Beethoven's 5th Symphony, and more than 435 recordings of Vivaldi's Four Seasons, has given way to a famine. Yes, EMI and the DG-Decca group continue to record, but at a reduced level, and for how much longer? Yes, the budget-price Naxos and a cluster of independent labels are still producing. But, as Lebrecht recently argued, the  <quote> "chain of interpretation" </quote>  that was such an integral part of classical recording has been ruptured.