To see all of the photos with presidents and world figures, to see the certificates and testimonials and newspaper articles and gifts and awards and trophies, you had to ask.

Doris Robinson didn't keep much of that stuff around the house, and kept even less in public view. Shelves in the house were stacked neatly with tokens from the countless awards Eddie Robinson received over the years, but they were there more for storage than display.

If Grambling State University can finally get the funding, it will establish a museum where more than two trailers' worth of stored memorabilia can be displayed to honor Coach Robinson's life.

But the little home on a country road on the edge of the town of Grambling with no sidewalks was a monument to the 75-year love affair between Eddie and Doris Robinson and the children they raised, not a shrine to his football life.

Asked, she proudly pulled out scrapbooks and photo albums and pointed out the famous people they knew, the players who were part of their lives. But during a visit to the Robinsons' home in the late summer of 2004, Doris Robinson talked more of the courtship that began in Baton Rouge when they were both 13 and in the seventh grade. That relationship continued through their high school years, even after Doris' parents sent her to a boarding school 124 miles away to break them up.

Eventually they went to the same college, transferred to another when Eddie felt the football coach was ignoring him, married and became Louisiana royalty.

Eddie often said that more than the nine national titles his Grambling Tigers won, more than the 200 players he sent to the NFL, his greatest pride was having one job and one wife for more than 50 years. He spent little time outside of his bedroom that day three years ago. Alzheimer's disease had already stripped him of his memories, so the papers that proclaimed his honorary degrees, his memberships into halls of fame, were no better than testaments of another man's life.

The phone rang all day with old players calling to see how Coach Rob was, whether Mrs. Robinson needed anything, if they could come by for a visit. She didn't put him on the phone because she knew it would be too confusing. She would pass on their love, and while the names, more often than not, would mean nothing to him, Eddie Robinson knew there were people outside that home who asked after him.

Only once did he leave the bedroom, shuffling so quietly in his slippers that Doris didn't hear him. He couldn't see her on the couch, sitting with a visitor and sharing iced tea, so he called for her:  <quote> "Baby? Baby? Where are you?" </quote> 

And when she said,  <quote> "I'm over here, baby," </quote>  the trace of worry in his face was gone, and he went back to bed, having felt the voice and seen the face of the only woman he ever loved, the only thing in his house he still knew.