GREG Norman should be spending this week celebrating the 20th anniversary of his long-awaited US Masters championship. Instead, he will be working at his Great White Shark Enterprises offices in Jupiter, Florida.

Larry Mize, meantime, will spend this week playing in the Masters recalling his unlikely shot for glory as a past champion of golf's greatest tournament.

Norman could probably afford to fly into Augusta on his G-550 and buy 1000 tickets to the Masters, but 혰 unlike Mize 혰 he can't play in the season's first major. Norman, three times a runner-up at Augusta National, hasn't played in the Masters in five years. Doesn't seem right, does it?

But destiny never was Norman's 15th club. That was true 20 years ago when Mize became the latest to slay him with a 41-metre chip that rolled down Augusta National's slippery 11th green into the pin and somehow reached right into Norman's chest and pulled out his heart.

Norman had a chance to match Mize's heroics had he made his nine-metre putt from the fringe to keep the 1987 play-off moving to a third hole. But after this stab-in-the-heart moment, the latest in a litany for Norman, there was little hope. The ball didn't scare the hole, the home-town fans cheered Mize and Norman staggered away.

 <quote> "Bob Tway holing out from the bunker (at the 1986 PGA Championship), I could live with," </quote>  Norman said.  <quote> "Robert Gamez and David Frost holing out from the fairway? Those hurt, but I got over them.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "The one that killed me inside was Larry's pitch. That was destiny saying, 'You aren't going to win this tournament.' That one really rocked me." </quote> 

Norman should have been used to such misery. The previous year, he became the first player to hold the lead entering the final round of all four majors 혰 the so-called Sunday Slam 혰 while winning the British Open. He was second to Jack Nicklaus at the Masters, 10th to Scott Simpson at the US Open and his 76 allowed Tway's holed bunker blast to beat him at the PGA Championship.

Mize was an unlikely foil. An Augusta resident, Mize, then 28, had won the 1983 Danny Thomas Memphis Classic and had finished 17th on the previous two years' money lists. But nothing pointed to this.

There Mize was, making a clutch 1.2-metre birdie putt at the 18th hole to join a play-off with Seve Ballesteros and Norman (combined majors: seven) against him (one tour win).

 <quote> "I had a healthy respect," </quote>  Mize said.  <quote> "But you can't fear someone you're playing. I didn't have any fear. I was confident going into the play-off because I played well that week. Also, a birdie at 18 was a big factor as well." </quote> 