Some of TV's most memorable game shows have asked everyday people to tap into their inner athletes.

So what exactly would happen if professional athletes were invited to play on these game shows? From the Nickelodeon classics like  <quote> "Legends of the Hidden Temple" </quote>  and  <quote> "Guts" </quote>  to the Japanese  <quote> "Unbeatable Banzuke" </quote>  to the recent  <quote> "Hole in the Wall," </quote>  it would be intriguing, absurd, and life-changing to watch athletes compete in these shows.

First, I have to mention one athlete who would work for basically any of these competitions. That athlete is Terrell Owens. Love him or hate him, Owens already has practice at this  <quote> "sport" </quote>  by participating in the NBA All-Star Celebrity game.

In fact, he's won more MVP's in that event than in the NFL. Inherent truths like these have Bill Walton screaming  <quote> "Goodness gracious, Terrell, where are your priorities?" </quote> 

Anyway, it's time to announce the ideal athletes I have participating in these game shows. Feel free to suggest who you would like to see as well.

Legends of the Hidden Temple

You have to think of safari-type people for this game show. It's hard to find athletes that fit this category. Personally, I think one of the best game show endings is when these contestants have to go through the Hidden Temple.

Undoubtedly, more than half the time, the contestants do not actually arrive at the final destination. They also could get  <quote> "kidnapped" </quote>  by the temple guards, which was frightening to me when I was a kid.

I'd like to see Louis Amundson and Anderson Varejao as teammates in this competition against Jon Barry and Brent Barry. In other words, a set of brothers against two crazy-haired kids that could easily be brothers. I know, Varejao is from Brazil.

My point is that I think the Barry family would get crushed by Louis and Anderson. I'm talking the type of performance that would leave Rick Barry crying in the stands afterwards.

Guts - The Aggro Crag

As you can see from the featured picture, I'd like to see a battle between Steve Nash, Tony Romo, and Manny Ramirez.

Third place: Romo has never won a playoff game, so he would naturally come in third place. Why? Numerous reasons. Jessica Simpson would be screaming from the stands, obviously distracting him.

He'd also probably remember the embarrassments of the past three Cowboys seasons. Believe me, I'm a Cowboys fan. I love Romo, but I also get the humor involved with him.

Second place: It's just Manny being Manny. Manny would throw several falling styrofoam rocks at Romo. By the end of the game, Romo would be at the bottom of the aggro crag mountain. Manny would be camping out midway up the mountain, just waiting for Romo to attempt to climb again.

First place: I mean, come on, who is the two-time MVP out of this trio? Steve Nash would not even be challenged in this competition. With the double entente of Jessica Simpson and Manny Ramirez making Romo's job nearly impossible, Steve Nash would race up the mountain in lightning speed.

Of course, he'd take time at the top of the mountain to look down at the Manny-Romo humor. In fact, he might even throw an assist to Manny by passing him one of the aggro crag styrofoam squares. After awhile, he'd get bored, and slam that button at the top to claim his Guts Aggro Crag Championship.

Unbeatable Banzuke - Stilts Obstacle Course

If you haven't seen Unbeatable Banzuke, start watching G4. This is a pretty amazing gameshow. There is much more athleticism and skill involved than the aforementioned Nickelodeon shows.

I don't like every competition on this show, but the one where people attempt to surpass obstacle courses on stilts is particularly incredible (and dangerous).

Naturally, I would like to see two  <quote> "athletes" </quote>  who are already on stilts in comparison to the rest of society. Former NBA Height Super Stars Shawn Bradley and Gheorghe Muresan have to face off in this competition.

On stilts, they would be around 8.5 to 9 feet tall. Not only would this look hilarious, but they would be in severe trouble once they fell. I mean tall people like these guys sprain their ankles just from walking around.

Imagine how badly they would be injured by falling on stilts. They might even break a leg. A normally built human on Unbeatable Banzuke is subject to extreme pain when failing on this show, so I can't even imagine what would happen to Bradley and Muresan.

In the end, I think Shawn Bradley would win this battle. His ability to hit 16-foot baseline jumpers shows his finesse. Also, he would win despite only staying on the stilts for five seconds. My apologies to Muresan.

Hole in the Wall

I decided to include this show because it is painfully terrible and hilarious. I probably have watched it for a combined 30 seconds, but I think I get the point. Shaquille O'Neal and Nate Robinson need to square off in this.

I want to see if Shaq could be knocked off the platform and actually fall into the green (correct color?) water. Nate Robinson would dominate. That guy could fit into any hole. And yes, that's what she said. Shaq would provide some nice humor though.

Anyway, that's that. Memorable sports game shows with memorable athletes. Could it get any better for reality TV? I'd watch it, that's for sure.

P.S. I apologize for the horrid Photoshop editing on the picture.