A Britney Spears statue breaks new ground in the business of giving birth, writes Jacqueline Maley.

ALAS, poor Britney, we knew her. Or at least we thought we did. It's hard to tell now that Ms Spears has been depicted in marble by an American artist sprawled on all fours as she gives birth to her son, Sean Preston.

Media reports tell us, although pictures have not yet confirmed, that young Sean can be seen  <quote> "crowning" </quote> . As for pop star Britney, her breasts are  <quote> "lactiferous" </quote> , her navel is protruding and her cat-like pose, well, it's jaunty enough to make Paris Hilton blush.

It must be noted that Brit herself did not authorise Monument to Pro-Life: the Birth of Sean Preston, let alone pose for it. It is entirely the frolic of artist Daniel Edwards, who has made the rather confusing claim that his sculpture is  <quote> "pro-life" </quote> , a three-dimensional tribute to the singer for choosing to put motherhood ahead of her career. The fact that Spears had a caesarean is nothing more than the quibble of a pedant.

Lincoln Capla, the co-director of the gallery where the marble Britney will be domiciled, said the statue's dedication  <quote> "honours Britney for the rarity of her choice and bravery of her decision" </quote> . (Braver still was the artist's unusual choice to depict the labouring Britney grasping the ears of a bearskin rug as she pushed. Since the motherhood movement of the 1970s mamas have gone for all sorts of dippy labour techniques, but the use of a pelt as a birthing aid has got to be new.)

Edwards says simply that  <quote> "people are inspired by the beauty of a pregnant woman" </quote> . Britney is not the first celebrity to be Depicted In An Artistic Fashion while with child. In 1991 the actress Demi Moore appeared nude and seven months pregnant on Vanity Fair's cover. In 2002 the supermodel Kate Moss posed for artist Lucien Freud, nude and pregnant.

Both portraits were remarkable not so much for their celebration of the pregnant form, but for how they managed to depict their subjects as stars first and mothers-to-be second, almost as if their pregnancies were simply the latest in a long line of classic  <quote> "looks" </quote> .

Yes, far from being a disturbing anomaly, the Britney birthing sculpture is merely the latest example of an emerging (forgive me) new genre: Pregnant Celebrity Art. Like most things, pregnancy is more beautiful and fascinating when celebrities do it and hence more worthy of being depicted in an arty way.

In a recent magazine interview, British actress Kate Winslet spoke at great length about her lactating breasts and how they helped her art. Winslet's latest role, in the Coen Brothers' Romance and Cigarettes, was filmed just weeks after the birth of her last child, when she was still breastfeeding. Apparently the bloated boobs made for terrific props and suited her character in the film. Her bosom also graces the promotional poster for the picture.

Stars love nothing more than to bleat about how their pregnancies made them feel  <quote> "sexy" </quote>  and how giving birth is a  <quote> "spiritual" </quote>  experience. They carry on as though it's a marvellously unique thing to do. The reality is we only celebrate pregnancy and the beauty of the pregnant body when it's sexy, or depicted as such, which is why celebrities have latched onto it as a promotional tool. While incontrovertible research shows having kids has a detrimental effect on the careers of normal women, babies are very good for business if you're a star.

But there is a caveat - if you're going to be a mummy, you must also be yummy. There is no use getting knocked up and looking dishevelled, bloated or, well, like a fat lady. You have to be a sex bomb, with a cartoon bosom and a come-hither look.

Killjoys will say pregnancy is not supposed to be sexy. They'll say that as the ultimate expression of the body's functionality, it is visceral and messy. Such types have obviously never laboured on bearskin.

Jacqueline Maley is a Herald journalist, currently working with The Guardian newspaper in London.
