Via Ponte Pizzeria Trattori, 13 Bridge St., Stockton. Dinner: 4-10 p.m. Mondays-Sundays. BYOW. Visa and Mastercard. Casual dress. Not wheelchair accessible. Reservations recommended: (609) 397-9397. www.viaponte.org. TWO AND A HALF STARS With the word  <quote> "pizzeria" </quote>  in its name, one might assume Via Ponte has little relation to fine dining, and that the dual title of  <quote> "trattoria" </quote>  would be merited only by the presence of a few simple entrees.

That mind-set leaves the casual visitor unprepared for such Sicilian delicacies as grilled veal rolls with currants ($27) or battered pan-fried codfish ($27) in a tomato sauce with potato, onion and raisins. Via Ponte actually is a lively hybrid serving both its pizzeria and trattoria identities well.

A tiled oven that cooks perfect pizzas is in the center of the dining room, fronted by a little bar where those looking for a view of the licking flames and the cooking pies will find what they seek in the way of visual entertainment while they eat. The remainder of the restaurant is more formal, with lemon-colored walls, a wrought-iron railing border, stained-glass insets among the windows and pale tablecloths on nicely spaced tables atop a polished wood floor.

Via Ponte, which means Bridge Street in Italian, was opened in the refurbished former Atrio Cafe as last summer waned. It's a venture between business and life partners Giuseppe Finazzo, the chef, and Katherine Wytovich. Finazzo, who comes from Sicily, has a deft technique with the raisins, currants and pine nuts that are typical of his native cuisine. Wytovich makes some of the desserts ($5.50), such as apple dumplings and a chocolate lava cake. Although she previously worked in public health, her grandfather's family had a restaurant in Austria, and she has cooked all her life.

Via Ponte is a popular place in tiny Stockton, even with three other restaurants about a stone's throw away, and two more just across the Delaware River. People come from farther afield than western Hunterdon County to Via Ponte, which also draws its many  <quote> "regulars" </quote>  from Mercer County and neighboring Pennsylvania.

Since the capacity is just 60 guests, that means on a weekend it's best to book a reservation, though we had trouble with ours. Whoever took it over the phone got the spelling wrong (it was made by a friend in his name) and messed up his phone number. Luckily, we arrived early enough to secure a table. I noticed later in the evening, however, that another party was having a discussion with the hostess that looked from a distance like our chat when we tried to set things to rights.

Communications also faltered when it was time for us to hear the many specials for the evening. Every time our server mentioned a dish, we had to ask the price; toward the end of her lengthy recitation, she finally caught on and started giving it to us routinely. If ever there was a place where the specials should be printed, this is it. By the time she finished her narration, we had forgotten the first items she told us, leading us to play a memory game at the table about what was available and how much it cost.

If you're looking for bargains, stick to the pizzas ($10 to $15), the calzones ($9 to $11) or the pastas ($14 to $19). The pizzas are perfect, with a crust that offers just the right blend of crisp and chewy, and a spectacular array of toppings. The Quattro Stagioni ($14) is layered with soppresatta, grilled pepper, onion and black olive, but those who don't want meat on their pie have lots of choices. For instance, there's a compelling shrimp and garlic combo ($15) or the Ortolana ($14) with a striking blend of onion, mushroom, sun-dried tomato, pepper, artichoke and calamata olives.

To expand the range of a pizza/pasta/calzone meal, add an appetizer and a salad. Instead of the usual green salad ($7), try the blend of string beans and potatoes, two contrasting elements enlivened by the slight sparkle of mint ($7).

The cold antipasto ($11) gets a twist from orange slices, teamed with olives, artichoke, prosciutto, other meats and fresh mozzarella, but the whole plate was drowning in olive oil, which defeated the dish's appeal. It was a lovely concept that required a more disciplined hand with the pouring.

Fried calamari ($10) and mussels ($10) sauteed with olive oil and white wine are among the regular starters. The specials are more venturesome, such as a well-prepared bundle of grilled asparagus wrapped with prosciutto ($7) or mushrooms neatly stuffed with ricotta and topped with prosciutto ($10). The rather watery brown sauce on which they sat, however, didn't do much for the dish, despite being redolent of basil.

The veal rolls are an intriguing concept because of the interplay among bread crumbs, parsley, currants, Pecorino cheese and those ubiquitous pine nuts, but they were a little too dry to make the impact that was intended. They are served with fava beans, also dry. A generous helping of sauce would have made all the difference here.

Other meat choices are lamb chops ($30) and steak, which is market-priced, so make sure your server tells you the tab if they are still reciting the specials when you come, since it was $32 on our visit.

A special of three quail ($30), also paired with those fat green fava beans, was nicely moist and perfectly done, plain but effective in the Sicilian style. The same straightforward approach worked for eggplant parmigiana ($19) with three cheeses and fresh tomato sauce. It benefited from the ground-at-our-table Parmesan, with which servers came by frequently. If you want a heartier pasta dish, there's always the lush Sicilian version of lasagna ($15), in which the broad noodles are layered with veal, beef, tomato sauce, and cheese, with bechamel sauce for an extra dose of calories.

Wytovich doesn't make all the desserts, but we thought a commercial almond cake of which she's fond was indeed a delightfully creamy cloud that was a nice way to end the meal if you wanted something different from the usual cheesecake or cannoli, good as they are.

As we relaxed over cappuccino ($4) and assessed our evening, we noted that even with the well-spaced tables, the place is quite noisy when it is fully occupied. The din was not unbearable, though it did lead us to raise our voices beyond the comfort level.

Still, the pluses outweigh the minuses at this convivial spot on its tree-shaded street (you can spot it a block away because of the locomotive mural painted on one side of the building.) You'll have another option in late spring, after Via Ponte opens for lunch.

 <quote> "When people come here to eat, they come back. I love our customers; they're great," </quote>  said Wytovich.

 <quote> "I'm so happy when new people come in, because I know they'll be back again." </quote>  
