Harlequins' Joe Marler, centre, clashes with Marcos Ayerza on Saturday.

It is a minor interruption to his progress and Marler need look no further than to a once-established England prop to see what can be done after a much longer absence, in Matt Stevens' case two years after testing positive for cocaine use. Quins' season, like Wasps', could turn on whether they can win Europe's second-tier Amlin Challenge Cup and Marler can feel hard done-by that his ban for retaliatory punching was the same as Marcos Ayerza's for the use of the head that provoked it. Both players admitted their guilt. Ayerza, who could have anticipated far longer, will miss an even bigger game, Leicester's against Leinster in Dublin on Friday in the quarter-finals of the Heineken Cup. Marler is only 20 but already is seen as a Test loosehead of the future, if not for this year's World Cup then certainly for the 2015 edition in England, by which time Andrew Sheridan ought to be out of the reckoning.

I was surprised he was man of the match Steve Meehan

With Sheridan injured, Alex Corbisiero has become the England incumbent. By removing his mohican hairdo in whatever bright colour, Corbisiero's future rival would make himself instantly less identifiable by referees, though the punches Marler threw at Ayerza at The Stoop occurred only after he had looked pleadingly at referee Wayne Barnes. Stevens is another of those barring Marler's way and is being punted by his Saracens coach Mark McCall as being more probable than possible for the World Cup this autumn. But it is scarcely two months since Stevens' suspension expired and he began his new career with Saracens. McCall's contention is based on eight appearances – a decent number in a short time, except that only three have been in Sarries' starting XV. Stevens, 28, was given the man-of-the-match bauble after Saracens beat Bath two days ago, causing bafflement to his old coach Steve Meehan. The departing Bath coach is counselling caution.

 <quote> “I was surprised he was man of the match,” </quote>  said Meehan.  <quote> “He's still a little raw and has some work to do. We'll see what comes of it over time. He certainly has some ability. He just needs to apply himself and keep working.” </quote>  McCall said something similar, but the temptation for England manager Martin Johnson to hurry Stevens back in June, when he names his long list for the World Cup, is already clear. Stevens was a tighthead, forever in competition with Phil Vickery, during his pre-cocaine incarnation, but Saracens have started him at loosehead in their past two matches and once at tighthead. Of his five appearances off the bench, three have been on the loose and two on the tight, meaning he has the precious gift of being able to pack down on either side and so is of even more interest to Johnson.
