The following advice applies to all modeling including fashion, print, commercial, art, nudes, glamour, goth, bondage, fetish, petites, parts, plus, midget, talent, improvisational, and impressionism.

© 2008. Pat Yuen

The following advice applies to all modeling including fashion, print, commercial, art, nudes, glamor, goth, bondage, fetish, petites, parts, plus, midget, talent, improvisational, and impressionism.

Make sure people can find you. Put in all your contact information on your online profiles, especially if you do nudes and glamour. If you have AIM, MSN, and YM addresses, be sure to include those in your profile so people can contact you for web cam interviews and evaluations.
People love self portraits. Cell phone pictures are preferred because they show the real you without too much retouching. For full body shots, simply find a mirror and take a picture of yourself in the mirror.
Once you sign up for a modeling profile you will instantly receive multiple paid offers. Yes it is that lucrative. If you like traveling give priority to those jobs. You will not have to pay for any expenses. You will usually get a cashier's check for all expenses including hotel and airfare. The only thing you might have to pay for is a work permit which is pretty standard.
If you are slightly overweight, just put your weight as 10 pounds. No one will notice. You don't even have to list your age. Just put 100 years. It will make you stand out from all those 17 year old profiles.
Bust

Wrap the tape under your armpits and around to the front of the fullest part of your chest. If you are flat chested, it is acceptable to put the tape measure OVER your arms to make up for it.
Waist

Measure at your natural waist at its slimmest part, which is approximately 2″ above your hip bone. If you have a tummy bulge, move the tape measure high enough to avoid the bulge.
Hips

Before taking your butt measurements, make sure you stand in front of a full length mirror and ask your loved one:  <quote> “Does my ass look fat?” </quote>  Then, measure the widest part of your butt.
Height requirements in modeling is myth created and perpetrated by existing models to keep others from entering the market and stealing their jobs. It is a fact that anyone can model because there is a great need from designers to have average people represent their clothes for real consumers. Clothing comes in all different sizes and there is a need for fashion models of all different sizes. Don't listen to those telling you that you can't. If you dream it, it will happen. If you are especially short, simply wear higher heels. After all, you can't tell how tall someone is in pictures.
Don't worry if you are overweight. Plus size modeling covers every size imaginable. Who do you think models clothes for big women? The demand is there. Go for your dreams.
If you are under 4′ 11″ consider signing with a petite modeling agency. There are plenty of those. Even the top agencies have petite divisions. Petite models are in higher demand in Denmark where there is a shortage of shorter models. Who knows, you might even get to travel.
Online magazines are another great avenue for exposure. Regardless of size or distribution, any publicity is good publicity. It's all about getting your face out there. Lots of top modeling agencies look through online magazines to find new talent so make sure you get on as many as possible. You won't get paid anything but it will lead to great things. Studies have shown that online magazines based on Myspace have the greatest potential for exposure. Look what it did for Tila Tequila. You can't argue with her success as a supermodel.
There are many agencies that also operate modeling schools. These can be a great resource because modeling is a lot more than just standing there and looking pretty. A few will even award you with a modeling certificate which will net you higher fees because you will be recognized internationally to be a trained model. Legitimate agencies will expect you to pay for some upfront cost such as comp cards, web sites, fax services, telephone expense, office rental, executive bonuses, photography, and Caribbean vacations for their top executives. This is perfectly normal. The agencies who ask you to register for a $600 fee are the most encouraging. It means they are interested in you and offering you a discount from the usual industry fee of $1000.
Do not start any TFP/TFCD shoot without the following documents signed.

A Model release detailing exactly how many pictures you will receive and when. This should also state how you will share in the copyright of the photos. TF* shoot should be an equal exchange and you should demand to own 50% of the copyright. It's only fair.
A Usage agreement from the photographer detailing the exact usage permitted of the images. Make sure this document states the images will not be sold to creepy Web sites. Make sure you use the term  <quote> “creepy” </quote>  because it is a legal term accepted in all 50 States, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
A written agreement detailing the terms of the exchange including how much your escort will be paid for his time and who will pay for lunch and parking. (Escorts are normally paid between $25-$50 per hour depending on the market)

People will tell you to check references but it's a waste of time. Do you really think a photographer will give you the name of a model who will bad mouth him? The best thing to do is to have long chats with the photographer, especially late at night. The best photographers are those will text you and call you multiple times a day to ask you about your day so far. It means he really cares. It's perfectly normal for a photographer to bring up sex in these preliminary conversations. He is only testing your comfort level prior to the shoot as during the shoot he may ask you to fantasize about your deepest sexual fantasies to get in the mood. This is perfectly normal and it will show well in your pictures.
If you meet the requirement of a fashion model and plan to submit pictures to a fashion agency, you WILL need professional portfolio pictures. There are many ways to accomplish this but the best way is to do as many TFCD/TFP as possible. Modeling is about practice and experience. Beginner models need the guidance of experienced photographers to show them the proper poses. If you are really lucky, a photographer may take you under his wings and become your manager. This is the best scenario you can hope for as you will get a photographer and manager for just the manager's fees. Of course, you may be required to do some nude posing for his private collection. This is an acceptable compromise for a long career in modeling and you can be assured that those pictures will not surface in the future. Once you have competed about 15-20 TFCD sessions, you may be ready to go see an agency. The best way to do this is to attend one of the many scouting conventions. They will have agents from all the top agencies present to evaluate you and the call back percentages from those conventions are amazingly high.
Facts about modeling. You inner beauty is the most important tool you have at your disposal. It will overcome all obstacles including height and beauty. Your inner beauty, drive, confidence, and determination will bring you success if you can use it to your advantage. Do not listen to anyone who tells you that you can't. They are just haters.
If someone tags your profile it means they are interested in you. Be sure to tag them back and quote them your rates. If you are unsure about your rates, get someone to say they are your manager and have him contact the photographer with a rate of say…$400 per hour. This makes you look more professional.
The best profiles are written in the third person. All professional press releases are written this way and you should get in the habit of doing the same. It exudes professionalism.
Whenever possible, work for credits no matter how small. Remember, there is no such thing as bad publicity.
Escorts: All models should bring an escort. Not only is this for your own personal safety, it makes you look more professional as all celebrities have an entourage. They are really just escorts. It does not matter who it is. Use your boyfriend, cousin, friend, or even hire someone for a small fee. The photographer will reimburse you for your escort cost.
The best way to see if you have what it takes is to enter a comment trading game and see what kind of comments you get.
If you have a bad shoot, make sure you start a thread to bring attention to the matter. You have to warn other models and it will make you feel better. If some of it was your fault, just fudge the details a little. No one will know. If the other person does come in to challenge you, it's no big deal. If it goes bad, just say you started the thread to get profile views or say you are doing a school project on social interaction. Everyone will say:  <quote> “Ahhhhh” </quote>  and forgive you.
