The Seat Leon is a holy terror on the European touring car circuit, but bad luck and driver error can often mean less than perfect results. So the team has been hard at work creating a virtual interface for the vehicle to take the human error out of the equation. By eliminating the driver, the car can be driven remotely and consistent fast laps are a virtual certainty. It's really unbelievable that nobody has been able to accomplish such a feat before now. And the way in which they've done it makes it look like child's play. In fact, it's as easy as driving a remote control car. No driver means less weight, so it's likely the team will have to carry ballast to make it more realistic competition -- a lot of it if it's supposed to simulate team manager and remote-control jockey Scott Dennis, according to driver Jason Plato). If they didn't, they'd be toying with the rest of the field.

Plato and fellow Seat Sport UK driver Darren Turner aren't too keen on the robotic car, but Scott Dennis says that they'd better get used to it. The advanced electronic system uses computers to replicate driver inputs while controlled from the comfort of the pits by Dennis. Dubbed the Telematics Remote-Information Control Kit, it is sure to surprise more than a few other drivers when it debuts April 1 at the season-opening race at Brands Hatch. The other teams would be foolish not to hop on board and try the TRICK system themselves.

Full release after the jump.

[Source: SEAT Sport UK]

Strictly embargoed until: 1st April 2007

SEAT UK TRIALS THE WORLD'S FIRST DRIVERLESS TOURING CAR

SEAT Sport UK is pioneering breathtaking new technology that could soon deliver the ultimate in 21st Century motor racing – the driverless touring car. Cutting-edge developments in electronics, virtual reality and on-board computers have enabled the SEAT team to create probably the most advanced remote control car in the world.

The unique Leon Touring Car could potentially join the two other SEAT Sport track cars – operated in more traditional fashion by humans Jason Plato and Darren Turner – in the 2007 Dunlop MSA British Touring Car Championship. Using a system developed in the UK by SEAT, called Telematics Remote-Information Control Kit, this car opens up all sorts of possibilities on the race circuit.

Controlled with the help of numerous on-board cameras, microphones and a plethora of computer data, the 'Virtual Leon' could give real drivers a stiff challenge. Indeed, at its first outing in a recent test at Rockingham, the sophisticated Leon put in a lap time marginally quicker than both Plato's and Turner's.

Of course, no piece of advanced technology can exist without the considerable skills and dedication of a top development team. And key to the whole project is SEAT UK Motorsport Manager Scott Dennis, who controls the car from the comfort of the pit-garage.

'This amazing car's development has been a huge learning curve,' said Scott. 'But we are now at the stage where it could soon be used in a touring car race – maybe even as soon as Sunday 1st April, which is the very first race of the season at Brands Hatch. This Leon is so rapid I'm beginning to question if I'll need drivers at all next year.'

Jason Plato, a BTCC driver with considerable experience of racing while actually sat behind the wheel, was surprised to be outpaced by a car with no one in it. 'Obviously it's a bit disconcerting being passed by an empty car when you're giving it your all, though I have to say it does have a fair old weight advantage over every other touring car.'

Plato's observation has already been noted by SEAT's competitors, who are demanding a significant weight penalty should the special Leon be permitted to race this weekend. Said Plato: 'Normally this would be around 75 kg to simulate a driver's weight, but in the case of Scott, a special 'Pub Ballast' of 160 kg has been suggested.'
