Southern rock gods Kings of Leon returned with their ambitious seventh LP, WALLS (an acronym for We Are Like Love Songs) last October. The set earned the family band their first No. 1 on Billboard‘s albums chart and, so far, they’ve released a delightful array of accompanying videos. The haunting clip for the title track and the celebratory  <quote> “Around the World” </quote>  video each stand on their own, but three others —  <quote> “Waste A Moment,” </quote>   <quote> “Find Me,” </quote>  and  <quote> “Reverend” </quote>  — share a compelling, Stranger Things-level-of-bizarre narrative.

Now, EW is exclusively premiering the trilogy version of those latter three music videos, which binds together the full adventure in one place. Two of the Followills, frontman Caleb and drummer Nathan, explain the trippy project below.

ENTERTAINMENT WEEKLY: Each of the videos separately chronicled a mysterious plot set in a small town. Where did the idea of tying them together with a larger story arc come from?

CALEB FOLLOWILL: It’s one of those ideas that comes up all the time. I think bands always think it sounds cool and then it winds up not making sense or it’s too scary to commit, creatively, that far in advance. But we are making strong aesthetic choices, embracing things that are different for us, and pushing ourselves on this album so [we] decided to go all-in on this strange story of weird things happening in this small town.

The plot itself is pretty out there. There’s time-travel, missing people, a sort of apocalyptic-touting news cycle… Where was that born?

CF: Thanks for calling it a plot. Can you explain it to us? It was always more about mood and themes, I guess. Dimitri [Basil], the director, has a strong style — [he’s] a fan of French new wave, I think, among other things — but plot wasn’t really first priority. We eventually came around to some buried themes around the world being in danger of losing things of substance, the TV weaponizing the message, and two versions of the future: one with TVs and the death of culture and another with a return radio culture and the things that matter. That’s when the future came in and time travel, et cetera. It became sci-fi along the way. But it was more a loose metaphor — I mean we f—ing love TV.

Do you guys enjoy the creative process that goes into these longer video projects? Is acting a medium you’re interested in?

NATHAN FOLLOWILL: We aren’t on screen that much, but to answer the question, yes. We like the idea of acting. We love movies. We get nervous about looking dumb. But we are in a place right now where if it feels risky, that means do it. It was fun.

Do you have plans for more videos for WALLS?

NF: Maybe. That would mean the album was spitting out more singles, so we hope so. Maybe we will make some things around some other songs that aren’t official videos. We’ve been wanting to do something where we actually perform the song in a video. Songs like  <quote> “Eyes on You” </quote>  would never get a video video but it’s great live and so fun to play, so maybe we’ll make something ourselves with a cool live concept. Who knows?

Kings of Leon’s trilogy cut is streaming exclusively on EW above. The band is currently on a world trek in support of WALLS. All dates are listed on their website.