Back in 2006, I reviewed the active noise-canceling Jabra C820 headphones, which were clearly modeled after the (since discontinued) $300 Bose QC2 headphones but cost about a third of the price and performed well enough to be considered a good deal.

I bring this up only because when I saw Monoprice's new active noise-canceling headphones, I was hit with a clear case of deja vu. They may not be exactly the same as those Jabras, but the concept is very similar: make a pretty good imitation of the Bose headphones but charge about a third of the price for them.

This is Monoprice's M.O. It's the electronics equivalent of a generic drug company, selling much cheaper versions of pricier name-brand products. In true Monoprice fashion, the headphones are simply called  <quote> "Noise Canceling Headphone (with Active Noise Reduction Technology)." </quote>  They start at around $113 if you want a single pair, but as with most Monoprice products, if you purchase them in larger quantities, the price goes down, dipping to a $100 unit price if you pick up 50 or more in one shot.

For better or worse, I ended up feeling the same way about them as felt about the Jabras. They're not as good as the top-rated Bose QC 15s, but they performed well enough to be considered a good deal for those on a budget who want a pair of noise-canceling headphones.

Sarah Tew/CNET

Design and features

While not quite as comfortable as the Bose QC15, this is a comfortable headphone that features memory foam earpads. Like the Bose, they're relatively lightweight for over-the-ear headphones (6.3 ounces), and they fit snugly though not too tightly on your head.

On the plus side, it's easy to access the battery compartment in the right earcup -- you simply slide the earcup's cover to the left to reveal it -- with one AAA battery powering the noise-cancellation circuitry for up to 50 hours. Also, the headphone cord is detachable, and Monoprice includes both a 58-inch standard cable and 55-inch cable with an inline microphone and control module (both terminate in an L-shaped plug). And no, the in-line remote isn't Apple certified, so it should work with most smartphones.

Sarah Tew/CNET

I also liked that you get a headphone/microphone splitter for use with PCs (a 3.5mm-to-1/4-inch plug adapter and an airline plug adapter are also included). And the headphones fold flat and come with a decent  <quote> "hard-shell" </quote>  zippered nylon storage case, which has a nylon mesh internal pocket to store the extra accessories.

All that's good stuff, but I did have a few complaints about the design, most of which concerned the cosmetics. The headphones simply look a little generic and cheap. The exteriors on the earcups have a glossy black finish that attracts fingerprints and seems prone to getting scratched. Oh, and I really think it's time Monoprice came up with a better logo to put on its products (perhaps  <quote> "MP" </quote>  would work?) rather than simply spelling out its name. It's the equivalent of having  <quote> "Costco" </quote>  displayed on each earcup. Some people might not mind rocking that with pride, but others might.