We need each other, especially when we don't feel like it, writes Charles Waterstreet.

We lost another one last week. The fourth lawyer in three months. Depression is an insidious disease, silently stalking its victim like a virus.

Misquoting Leo Tolstoy for a moment:  <quote> "Happy family members are all alike, every unhappy family member is unhappy in its own way." </quote>  Every suicide has its own story. The mood might have passed in the blink of an eye. Yet suicide seemed the only way out. The deceased certainly believed that, for what he perceived to be good reason. Daylight might bring a different thought. Every adult should be on suicide watch for each other.

Depression, like bad weather, will in most cases pass, even category fives. The trick is to batten down and plan, and don't leave it to president Bush to help. We need each other, especially when we don't feel like it. Misery does not love company. Sometimes suicide appears to be a mercy killing - without an accomplice.

Anecdotal evidence says dentists have the highest suicide rates among the professions, hence the expression  <quote> "looking down in the mouth" </quote> . It is an extraordinary calling and, judging by my dental bills, a very financially rewarding one. I have paid a very high price for Albury's decision, by a landslide referendum, to veto fluoride in the water supply in 1961.

Dentists do not see people at their best. It has been said that many pursued the profession when failing to make the cut for medicine at university. The late advent of fluoride did not lessen the visits to the dentist. Adolescent teeth suddenly needed to be scaffolded in expensive braces to stop them looking like a neglected cemetery. A depressive might say one door shuts, another closes.

Detailed studies in Britain show vets are at a high risk of suicide. No, not war veterans but veterinarians. Anecdotally, they were those who couldn't get into dentistry but loved animals. A study by the Australian Veterinary Journal in 2008 found  <quote> "vets are four times more likely to commit suicide" </quote>  than the rest of the population. It's not something they can catch from their clients. Animals do not commit suicide.

Advertisement

What dentists, veterinarians and barristers do have in common is they are professions which traditionally practice alone. They might gather in chambers, partnerships or, as we say, share rooms but the day-to-day operation of the business is up to the individual. The buck and the bucks stop with you. The agonies of decisions, contradictions, choices, clashes, taxes, are all in your own head to work out. Even monks have each other in the monastery.

The disease can be found anywhere in the courtroom. During one of the most difficult trials I have had the privilege of appearing in, my client, a young law student, became suicidally depressed. She was found to be unfit to stand trial but a relentless Crown insisted on continuing with a special hearing. Kala Subramanian, the young defendant, sat in court with her head in her hands, unable to participate in any way.

The good news is she survived - but the judge in the case did not. He killed himself within days of the trial finishing.

(In a weird twist of fate, Marcus Einfeld later took Kala's case to the High Court pro bono. He was successful. At its heart it involved an allegation that she had falsely claimed to be the driver of her boss's car, which had been photographed by a red light camera. Coincidence is God's way of remaining anonymous.)

The blues can come out of the blue but are more likely to come out of the black. As I write this, I just learnt that another young criminal lawyer friend - Steve Dack - was found dead at his house by his brother.

There is rarely good news at the criminal bar. The nature of our work is combative, nit-picking and negative. We deal with people who have immense problems which we take on. When I was married, I tended to continue cross-examination at home.

A clever cross-examiner is sometimes compared with a surgeon. It is said the best surgeons are the most cold-hearted. A tough, thorough and clinical approach in the operating theatre is hard to replicate as a professional lawyer in the theatre of the absurd that is the courtroom.

Many professionals like myself seek solace in the sauce. The high rates of suicide in the professions parallel the rates of alcoholism and drug use. The highest rate of drug addiction is among anaesthestists, and why not? They can get it by just reaching out.

Of course, depression has no class barrier, no economic boundaries; it can strike barristers and bikies alike. It can be biological and perhaps even hereditary. It may even be caused by marriage. The poet Ted Hughes lost both of his wives to depression and, in turn, his child. If we don't talk about it, it will never go away or will be called by another name, such as alcoholism or drug addiction.

It is particularly important when public figures like Paul Menzies, QC, and Geoff Gallup speak openly about the black dog, because then its bark will announce and warn of its bite. My father often banged on about living through the Great Depression but let me tell you, there's nothing great about depression.

PS - Many of the homeless from the alcoves of Victoria Street in Darlinghurst and the courthouse verandas of the Downing Street centre and King Street court will feel the pinch with the passing of Steve. Every homeless hobo called him by name and he never missed them, not with coins but with tens and twenties crushed into a ball and palmed to them quietly, with dignity. He understood where they were coming from.

For help and information: Lifeline 13 11 14 or www.lifeline.org.au

Beyondblue 1300 224 636 or www.beyondblue.org.au
