Trade tension between the US and China has escalated rapidly. A mere 11 hours after the US listed 1,333 Chinese products to be hit with punitive tariffs, Beijing said it would impose similar 25 per cent penalties on 106 American-made products.

This latest front in a growing trade war stems from US allegations that China routinely forces American companies to share intellectual property with Chinese partners in return for access to Chinese markets or simply steals US technology.

The US is targeting products in high-tech and industrial sectors where China wants to be a world leader by 2025. It has excluded products where penalties might cause disruption to the US economy or those that would hit consumers hard.

In total, these amount to annual imports worth about $50bn. That is not a large sum when compared with the $2.4tn of US total goods imports in 2017 or the $506bn of US imports from China.

Adam Slater, lead global economist at Oxford Economics, sees the  <quote> “scope of the moves to date as relatively limited” </quote> . According to Oxford Economics calculations, the planned tariffs, if implemented,  <quote> “would have a marginal impact on the US economy” </quote> .

None of the top five US imports goods from China is affected by the tariffs and only a tariff on colour television reception apparatus (set-top boxes and aerials) makes it into the top 10. Around nine in 10 of the 1,333 products were worth less than $50m in 2017.

Nonetheless, some of them account for a significant share of US imports. In value terms, about a third of colour televisions or printers, for example, came from China last year. The proportion rises to nearly 40 per cent for aluminium alloy and plates.

In response, the Chinese Ministry of Commerce is slapping 25 per cent tariffs on 106 American products including soyabeans, other agricultural products, chemicals and selected aircraft. These selected import product lines were worth about $50bn in 2017, strategically the same value of Chinese imports affected by the US tariffs.

Tariffs on soyabeans will be a big concern for US producers. China is by far the largest export market for American soyabean farmers, eight times large than Mexico, the second biggest buyer. Of a total of $22bn in US soyabean exports last year, about 56 per cent went to China. US soyabeans exports to China are worth the same as the next 10 export products on the tariff list combined.

President Donald Trump has been waging a long campaign to reduce the US trade deficit, making China an obvious target.

In 2017, the US had goods trade deficit of more than $811bn, up $59bn on 2016. China accounts for $376bn of that.

However, the  <quote> “US trade deficit is very unlikely to shrink” </quote>  as a result of the US measures, said Paul Donovan, chief economist at UBS Wealth Management.

China said it would impose the planned tariffs only when the US does so, a calibrated approach that leaves time for negotiations.

The US accounts for about 20 per cent of all Chinese goods exports, whereas China buys only about 10 per cent of exported US products.

However, the US share of exports to the Asian giant has been increasing steadily since 2000, while China relies less on the US that it did in the early 2000s.