It is a typical Saturday in an Australian suburb. You wake to the sound of birdsong and the  <quote> "thump, thump, thump" </quote>  of the spear-point bringing up the borewater.

Suddenly the morning is shattered by the sound of a Victa firing up. You lie in bed, picturing the mower chewing across a rectangle of buffalo at No.37, as the smell of fresh-cut grass wafts over the palings.

In an episode of Australia Now, broadcast on ABC Radio National, Sue Slamen observed that while most Australians have chosen to raise their families in suburbia,  <quote> "Australian artists have not found suburban man mowing his quarter-acre block with a push-along lawnmower any substitute for the heroic figures associated with the bush legend " </quote> 

It's difficult to argue with her; few Australian artists seem to have found inspiration in the 'burbs. Notable exceptions include Chris O'Doherty, aka Reg Mombassa - who famously portrayed suburban man with lawnmower in Australian Jesus Heaven and Hell (1994) - and his brother Peter O'Doherty.

But it is the late Melbourne artist Howard Arkley who is often acknowledged as the pre-eminent painter of Australia's sprawling suburbs. A retrospective of his work, Carnivale of Suburbia, is showing at the Art Gallery of NSW.

Arkley's work has been described as everything from ambivalent and banal to celebratory and disturbing. It might be glib to point out it's probably all of the above, and his day-glo images can be read in a variety of ways, not the least depending on the viewer's own experience with suburbia and its discontents.

Even Arkley admitted to a love-hate relationship with the suburbs.  <quote> "I wouldn't want to live there," </quote>  he said. In this respect, he was no doubt speaking for artists everywhere; the suburbs have never been a friendly place for a man with a sable brush.

As a result, suburbia has often been lampooned by the cultural elite. From Edna Everage to Kath and Kim, suburbia is portrayed as the last bastion of mediocrity, bad taste and sheer ugliness.

Yet more than 80 per cent of Australians live in the suburbs. As Steve Bedwell notes in his book Suburban Icons:  <quote> "Australia is the great suburban southland, we are a nation of suburban boys and girls, each with fondness for our own quarter-acre." </quote> 

On the rare occasions when the art world ventures out to the land of the long white Commodore, it's usually to state the negative. Consider the stinging work of British photographer Victor Burgin and his images of desolate English housing estates, in such seminal pieces as Today is the tomorrow you were promised yesterday.