Sometimes it's best to step into the cold, harsh light of truth on your own before it's thrust upon you. That's what I'm choosing to do now, as it's only a matter of time before someone exposes my secret.

I, Lance Ulanoff, the Editor-in-Chief of PC Magazine, still use Windows 3.1.

That's right. I use the 16-year-old Microsoft operating system every day and for everything. Now, don't misunderstand or underestimate the gravity of this confession.

Knowing what we do about Windows Vista, I don't think anyone would question my decision to steer clear of it in the workplace. Yet, many of you are surely questioning why and how I bypassed Windows 95, 98, 2000, NT, and XP. Put simply, I just did not see their benefits.
Me on the PC
Me using the 5.25 and 3.5-inch floppy disks
Me pushing Cisco off his chair
Me trying to jam my floppy disk into the laptop
Me dictating a column to Cisco
Me being confronted by Jeremy and Dan.
VIEW ALL PHOTOS IN GALLERY

Windows 3.1 is a lovely, lightweight operating system, with a simple interface. PIF files reign supreme, and the Control Panel features a manageable 16 items. The 256-color operating system happily coexists with my 5.25- and 3.5-inch floppy disks and, more importantly, with my all-time favorite word processor, XyWrite III. The command-line software takes the old 80/20 usage rule and flips it on its head: I use 100 percent of XyWrite's features 100 percent of the time. Nothing compares.

By running Windows 3.1 for all these years, I've been able to stick with the same Compaq PC. It's a 33-MHz 486 with 16MB RAM and a 300-MB hard drive. I paid $4,799 for it in 1991 and have been using it at home and in the office (I throw it in a rolling piece of luggage every day) for 5,845 days. I hope to use it for another thousand more. It still runs like a dream, though I admit that it could use some body work.

My decision to run Windows 3.1 on my home and work desktops means that I have to be somewhat more creative than, say, someone running Windows XP. I've tried going online via EarthLink—CrossTalk didn't work—using my 9,600-baud MultiTech modem, but it's too slow to be useful. So, if I want to go online, edit photos, watch videos, listen to music more complicated than a beep, play any game other than solitaire, store files over a megabyte, or share files over a network, I have to borrow someone else's system. It's a bit of a pain, but no one in the lab seems to mind when I shove them off their bench chairs and try to jam one of my floppy disks into their PCs.

Lately, I've found that none of the other PCs in the office have 3.5-inch floppy disk drives, let alone slots for 5.25-inch disks. This makes it somewhat difficult to process my files, but I've found a solution: I compose my columns, reviews, and the like on Xywrite III and print them out on my Epson MX-80 dot matrix printer. Then I hand the printout to the nearest intern and ask him or her to type it into their PC and move the file along on the network. I've even been known to skip the PC entirely and have someone transcribe it.—Next: I Can Compute >
