A young man wearing a top hat cuts a cigar with a red sickle. His nose is distended into a hook. He is surrounded by images of French politicians under the heading:  <quote> “The truth about Macron’s galaxy.” </quote>  It doesn’t take much fluency in racist propaganda to see what is going on: here is the liberal candidate in France’s presidential election as archetypal Jewish conspirator at the hub of global capitalism and communism.

The cartoon was posted a few weeks ago from the official Twitter account of Les Républicains, the party of François Fillon, a conservative rival for the presidency. It was quickly deleted. Fillon apologised and said errant staff would be disciplined. The election caravan moved on to bigger scandals.

Emmanuel Macron is Catholic but that doesn’t confer immunity from vintage antisemitism. He worked for Rothschild, the investment bank, which every Jew-spotting paranoiac knows is synonymous with Israelite global manipulation.

In the early 1990s, when I was studying in Moscow, there was a conspiracy theory doing the rounds that Boris Yeltsin’s real name was Baruch Yeltzer. For militant Soviet nostalgists and neo-Nazis it was unthinkable that the man who broke the USSR, thus humiliating Russia, could be a true-blooded Russian. So they rebranded him as a Jew.

The end of the cold war stoked enmities that had been tranquillised for decades. Russians made crushing rebellion in the Caucasus sound like unfinished business from the wars of Tsar Alexander I. In the Baltic states, politics was steeped in recrimination over who had collaborated with whom in the competition for control between Nazis and the Red Army 50 years earlier. There were fears of a spiral into expulsions, plunder and genocide, as had happened when Yugoslavia’s national scars split open.

We tend to presume that history is formed at an even rate. If the passage of time is a constant, the past should always be getting further away. But it doesn’t work like that. At times of upheaval and disorientation, the past has a way of invading the present. When structures that looked immutable start to mutate, when political assumptions that were frozen solid begin to melt, forgotten layers of identity are revealed. The putrescent carcasses of buried conflicts are exposed, poisoning the air.

The current crisis of confidence in western democracies does not equal the dissolution of the Eastern bloc. The European Union isn’t about to unravel as the Soviet Union did because, outside the lurid fantasies of Brexit provocateurs, the two entities are not alike. The EU is a collaborative project that respects human rights and political pluralism. The USSR was a one-party authoritarian superstate.

Yet the economic order that has prevailed without substantial challenge since the early 1990s looks brittle. Frustration at the impotence and self-absorption of a professional political class is epidemic. So is the perception that a financial elite has captured the proceeds of growth and that opportunities available to the next generation are more paltry than those enjoyed by their parents.

The future of the west is shrouded in despondency – a feeling of epochal stagnation underscored by the relative dynamism of wrecker candidates preaching political sabotage. Perhaps collective inability to imagine what comes next is a factor reanimating the past. Or maybe at times of stress whole cultures, like individuals, fall back on gut reactions, fears and prejudices that rational cognition might overrule in calmer moments.

Whatever the cause, there is something visceral and subliminal about the way politics across the west is fidgeting with anti-Jewish idioms. Whether intentional or not, there is antique spite lurking in the fashionable analysis that laments the excessive influence of  <quote> “metropolitan elites” </quote>  and  <quote> “citizens of nowhere” </quote> . Soviet propaganda queried the patriotism of  <quote> “rootless cosmopolitans” </quote> .

When a Facebook army of the radical left rushes to defend Ken Livingstone from accusations of antisemitism, while depicting him as the victim of a campaign by  <quote> “Zionists” </quote>  or a shadowy  <quote> “Israel lobby” </quote>  that dictates the media’s script, it is worth pondering the etymology of that rhetoric.

Nor has the normalisation of Islamophobia happened overnight. There are complex currents of anxiety arising from terrorist attacks in recent years and their conflation in public discourse with refugee flight from the Middle East and north Africa. But the deliberate misrepresentation by nationalists of an entire religion as a fifth column, harbouring who knows what level of murderous impulse, conjures a different spectre. Marine Le Pen in France and Geert Wilders in the Netherlands activate centuries-old reflexes of Christian recoil against the idea of encroaching Islam. When Brexit campaigners deployed posters suggesting Turks massing at the EU’s gates, they were probing dark recesses of the European psyche.

In the grand scheme of continental history, the 1683 Ottoman siege of Vienna was not long ago. It isn’t much older than the 1707 Act of Union between England and Scotland, which is still pretty current in UK politics. And that was six years before the treaty of Utrecht in which Spain ceded sovereignty over Gibraltar. It is easy to dismiss the recent spasm of jingoism over the Rock as a silly ritual performed by a country that is jumpy ahead of tricky negotiations. But Brexit makes old agreements negotiable and that makes historical disputes more recent, which is a step towards making them dangerous.

The more recently a conflict was frozen, the faster it defrosts. Taking evidence from Irish politicians, parliament’s Brexit select committee heard blunt testimony about the historical proximity of the Troubles.  <quote> “The Good Friday agreement is … still a process and not a finished product,” </quote>  notes the subsequent report.  <quote> “If there are border posts and physical controls, they will become targets.” </quote>  The blood stopped flowing recently enough that a botched EU deal can rip off the scab.

Maybe this sounds overwrought. We live in turbulent times but there are still boundaries to contain a surge in tribal European feuding and systematic racial scapegoating, aren’t there? I no longer know for sure. The sky is not falling. The ground beneath our feet is firm. But there is a whiff in the air, stale and sulphurous, as if rising from the soil after a thaw. It might pass. Or it might be the waking of dormant volcanoes.
