The dysfunctional yellow family of the hit animated television series The Simpsons will explode onto the big screen in July 2007, 20th Century Fox studios has announced.

The long-awaited feature film starring Homer, Bart and the rest of the zany cast will hit US screens on July 27, 2007, the studio said.

The studio revealed the news with a surprise sneak trailer tagged onto copies of the movie Ice Age: The Meltdown, which opened in the US at the weekend.

The promotional clip showed a close-up of Superman's famed  <quote> "S" </quote>  logo before the image widened to reveal it was emblazoned on an under-sized T-shirt worn by Simpsons' patriarch Homer.

The release date of the Simpsons film was then flashed on the screen, ending two years of suspense that followed the announcement of plans for a Simpsons movie.

 <quote> "I can absolutely guarantee that this film will far exceed the wildest expectations of every Simpsons fan," </quote>  producer Al Jean said in a statement.

The movie will star many of the same voices that drive the famed animated characters of the show that is now in its 16th year, making it the longest-running animated television series in history.

The series' regular voices of Dan Castellaneta, Julie Kavner, Nancy Cartwright, Yeardley Smith, Hank Azaria, Harry Shearer, Pamela Hayden and Tress MacNeille will return.

Guest starring in the movie will be US lawyer Erin Brockovich, who had a film made about her, British actress Minnie Driver and Albert Brooks.

The Simpsons executive producer James L Brooks, its creator Matt Groening as well as producers Jean, Scully and Richard Sakai will co-produce the feature.

The script was written by Groening, Brooks, Jean, Scully, Ian Maxtone-Graham, George Meyer, David Mirkin, Mike Reiss, Matt Selman, John Swartzwelder, and Jon Vitti - all series veterans.

 <quote> "This was enormously challenging, because it involved filling 120 blank pages with an actual story and words people say," </quote>  said producer Brooks.

 <quote> "We're very excited about the performances in this movie. Come next Oscars, we think it's going to be Milhouse's night," </quote>  Groening said.

Plans for a big-screen feature version of the globally syndicated show have been talked about in Hollywood for more than a decade, but Groening and his team were very careful about over-exploiting the successful franchise.

The show and its characters - who include dad Homer, the mischievous Bart, his sisters Lisa and Maggie, and their mother, Marge - have generated pithy comedy while also tackling or pillorying sensitive social or political issues.

Its more than 300 episodes have frequently caused outrage, including one infamous episode portraying adoption and poverty in Brazil that prompted a protest from the city of Rio de Janeiro, which threatened to sue.

Former US vice-president Dan Quayle was mercilessly ribbed by Groening and his team - in the guise of Bart - in 1992, after he notoriously misspelled the world  <quote> "potato" </quote>  during a visit to an elementary school.
