Brazilian Jo plans to stick with Toffees as on loan Manchester City striker sets his sights on summer switch to Everton

By Sportsmail Reporter

Jo has hit out at the way he has been treated by Manchester City - and admitted he does not want to return.

The Brazilian striker joined City for £18million last summer but made only six Premier League starts before he was loaned to Everton.

The 22-year-old scored two goals on his debut for the Toffees - trebling his league tally in the process - and has revealed Goodison Park now feels like 'home'.

Blue is the colour: Jo has enjoyed fine form since his January loan switch to Everton, where he hopes to stay beyond May

'The people here have given me much more support. I felt it from the first moment I came to the club and every footballer needs that kind of care,' Jo told The Guardian.

'Phil Neville is never too far away, always asking if I am okay, if I need anything. But it's all the players, not just Phil. They have all looked out for me.

'It feels like Everton is my home now.'

Regarding his brief stint at Eastlands, the Brazilian striker added: 'I think it's a little unfair. I was only there six months and I would call that an adaptation period.

'In my opinion, you should have at least one season to adapt before everyone judges you. Unfortunately no-one really thinks like that.

Held back: Jo does not want to go back to Eastlands after failing to get a vote of confidence during his brief six month spell at City

'I find it strange because I had quite a good start and then for some reason - something that has never been explained to me - I was suddenly no longer playing.

'I was training well, like I normally do, but I didn't have happiness.'

Now Jo, who revealed he has not spoken to City manager Mark Hughes since his move Everton, is hoping to stay at Goodison Park at the end of the season.

'If I had to choose, I will choose to stay at Everton,' he admitted.

'But if I have to go back to City, I will go back. I believe in myself and, if I go back, I will try to show what I can do.'