Equal Pay Day highlights continuing inequality. (Sam Edwards/Getty Images) Tuesday's Equal Pay Day spotlights the disparities that still exist between men and women in the workplace, with women earning an average of 80 cents for every dollar men make.



Just last week, President Donald Trump revoked the 2014 Fair Pay and Safe Workplaces order, initiated by former President Barack Obama and seen as a major gain for women's pay and safety against sexual harassment in the workplace.



In order for women to gain more social equality, they need to be able to reach their economic potential, the McKinsey Global Institute said in a 2016 study exploring the state of gender equality in the U.S. According to the study, the nation could advance its annual GDP by $4.3 trillion in 2025 if women were to gain full gender equality.



Data from the study were used to create the Best States gender equality ranking. The ranking takes into account factors including gender differences in states' labor force participation rates, managerial positions, higher education and political representation. It also looks at indicators like maternal mortality and violence against women.



All of the states performed poorly for the prevalence of single mothers, violence against women and equal political representation.



Based on all of the measures, states were given a parity score from 0 to 1, with 1 indicating complete parity. Many of the top states tied, including a three-way tie for second place and for fifth place. Massachusetts

Massachusetts (Brett Ziegler for USN&WR) Gender equality ranking: 5

Parity score: .69

Overall rank: 1



The New England region generally scored well for gender equality. Massachusetts excelled in equality in higher education and in low maternal mortality rates. Most states performed the best in these two categories. Massachusetts struggled with equality in political representation, prevalence of single mothers and violence against women, as all of the states did. Arizona

Arizona David Liu/iStockphoto Gender equality ranking: 5

Parity score: .69

Overall rank: 34



Arizona performed well for low maternal mortality rates and had fairly low levels of inequality in labor force participation, unpaid care at work and higher education. Hawaii

Hawaii Reuters Gender equality ranking: 5

Parity score: .69

Overall rank: 27



Hawaii has very low gender equality in higher education and what the study considers a  <quote> "medium" </quote>  level of inequality for most other categories, including labor force participation, managerial positions and unpaid care work. Connecticut

Connecticut (Denis Jr. Tangney/iStockphoto) Gender equality ranking: 2

Parity score: .70

Overall rank: 12



Connecticut showed low rates of maternal mortality and low inequality in higher education. It performed better than most states for equality in political representation. Minnesota

Minnesota (University of Minnesota) Gender equality ranking: 2

Parity score: .70

Overall rank: 3



Minnesota had less inequality in unpaid care work than most states and low levels of maternal mortality, compared to the national average and the rest of the Midwest. New Hampshire

New Hampshire (iStockphoto) Gender equality ranking: 2

Parity score: .70

Overall rank: 2



New Hampshire, which ranks No.1 in the Best States overall equality ranking, takes No. 2 for gender equality. It reported less teenage pregnancies than the rest of the Northeast and had more equality in political representation than both its region and the national average. Maine