National treasures Ant and Dec have confirmed their split after falling out in a north London branch of IKEA.

The presenting duo, whose friendship stretches back 25 years, are reportedly no longer on speaking terms as Dec prepares to launch a solo career with the pair's old management team.

‘Ant McPartlin and Declan Donnelly have gone their separate ways after a long and successful entertainment career as a double act,' their spokesperson Flora Lopis confirmed.

‘Dec will now be known simply as Dec and is excited to get back to work as soon as possible. He is already looking into future projects and has signed up for a new series of Dec's Saturday Night Takeaway.'
Anthony McPartlin and Declan Donnelly watch a video before they are presented with the Landmark Award during the 2014 National Television Awards at the O2 Arena, London. PRESS ASSOCIATION Photo. Picture date: Wednesday January 22, 2014. See PA story SHOWBIZ Awards. Photo credit should read: Ian West/PA Wire
The duo have won plenty of awards as a pair (Picture: Ian West/PA Wire)

The Geordie twosome, both 38, are alleged to have argued loudly in the Wembley IKEA on Friday night after Ant embarrassed Dec by lying on a bed as the pair shopped for shelving units.

One fellow shopper overheard Dec shout: ‘This is the last straw, man!' before shutting himself in a show bathroom.

Ant was later seen chewing ‘forlornly' on some meatballs in IKEA's canteen as Dec queued alone to pay downstairs.

MORE: Ant and Dec's best moments
IKEA was the scene of the boys' big bust-up (Picture: AP)
IKEA was the scene of the boys' big bust-up (Picture: AP)

A source close to the pair told Metro: ‘Ant is furious. As far as he's concerned, he's been betrayed by his best friend and his management team. He didn't even like the shelving unit that much.'

Ant and Dec first met on the set of BBC teen drama Byker Grove in 1989 and soon became best friends.

After leaving the show, they took on the music world as PJ & Duncan, releasing hits including Let's Get Ready To Rhumble, Shout and U Krazy Katz.
THIS IMAGE IS STRICTLY EMBARGOED UNTIL 00.01 on FRIDAY 25TH OCTOBER. COPYRIGHT ITV - FOR EDITORIAL RIGHTS ONLY Ant and Dec prepare for the jungle ahead of I'm a Celebrity... Get Me Out of Here! returning to ITV. Ant and Dec have filmed a special promo that will be seen on ITV for the first time on Sunday evening. Ant and Dec are seen arriving in the Australian Outback , and when Dec asks if a limo will be picking them up, Ant tells him,  <quote> "We don't need a limo Dec. This year it's going to be a lot tougher, we need to live and breathe the outback." </quote>   <quote> "I thought it was only supposed to be tougher for the celebrities," </quote>  says Dec.  <quote> "When in Rome Declan, when in Rome," </quote>  says Ant. Dec gets a shock when a tatty pick up truck pulls up and the driver asks if they are Ant and Dick. Dec is quick to correct the mispronunciation of his name. The boys jump on the back of the truck, only to find they are sharing their lift with a hungry crocodile called Gerald. The tongue-in-cheek promo aims to whet viewers' appetites for the fun that is soon to be had when I'm a Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! returns to ITV next month. Please find pictures on the attached contact sheet. High res images are available from shane.chapman@itv.com. ARCHIVE REQUESTS: CHRIS MCHUGH AT REX FEATURES CMCHUGH@REXFEATURES.COM REX FEATURES 0207 278 7298
Ant and Dec presented I'm A Celebrity together (Picture: Rex)

The pair then transformed their careers with a long-running stint as the nation's favourite TV presenting team, hosting shows like SMTV, Britain's Got Talent and I'm A Celebrity…Get Me Out Of Here!

It is believed that Dec will buy Ant out of their production company Mitre, while Ant will have sole custody of their pet dog, Beyoncé.

It is not known how the pair will divide their other assets, or what will become of their reported £1m insurance policies against each other's death.

Read more: http://metro.co.uk/2014/04/01/ant-and-dec-fall-out-dec-reinvents-self-as-dec-4540994/#ixzz4VIeVCHT1
