According to a recent news announcement from 4Kids Entertainment, the New York based company has acquired the U.S. distribution rights to Ebichu Minds the House. An Anime News Network staff member was able to get a hold of Alfred R. Kahn, Chairman & C.E.O. of 4Kids, who had this to say in regards to the announcement.  <quote> “Our recent goal as a company is to try and become more diverse. One way to accomplish this goal is to deal with other companies we've never had the chance of working with before. Gainax particularly grabbed our interests because we noticed how popular their shows have become with American audiences.” </quote> 

In response as to why 4Kids Entertainment decided to distribute Ebichu, tentatively to be re-titled Sally Cleans House, Mr. Kahn replied,  <quote> “In our goal to become more diverse, we've decided to present audiences with types of shows we haven't done before. In the past, our programming has been directed towards the young male demographic. Recently, we've chosen to reach out to female viewers as well with the broadcast of programs such as Mew Mew Power. But even though we've been able to gain a broader audience, the majority of our programming contains the elements of an average action series. We wanted to do something totally different from that. Ebichu gained our attention for a number of reasons. The main reason we enjoyed it so much was because of the simplicity of the series. The show features no super heroic characters or settings, just the basic story of a young hamster as she does her best to look after her master. This basic plot setting is what we found unique and thought it was perfect for our ideal goals” </quote> 

With production already underway for the series, and plans to broadcast the series on 4Kids TV in September, no word has been made on whether or not Ebichu will be released on un-cut, bilingual DVDs. But Mr. Kahn has stated,  <quote> "We'll be handling this series with the same professional quality viewers have come to expect from us. We hope that viewers get a chance to watch it, and we hope they enjoy it very much.” </quote> 
