• Pumas to host Wallabies in repeat of Rugby World Cup semi-final • First Rugby Championship Test to be played outside competing nations

Twickenham will stage a Rugby Championship Test match between Argentina and Australia later this year.

The tournament organiser, Sanzaar, has confirmed Saturday 8 October as the date for a fixture that will make history as the first Rugby Championship match to be played outside any of the competing nations – Australia, Argentina, New Zealand and South Africa.

Australia's Adam Ashley-Cooper sees off Argentina with hat-trick Read more

The game, which counts as a home fixture for Argentina, will conclude this year's competition, which starts on 20 August and also incorporates venues such as Sydney, Wellington, Buenos Aires and Brisbane.

It means that Argentina and Australia will be back at Twickenham almost a year after they met each other on the same ground in a World Cup semi-final that the Wallabies won 29-15.

The Sanzaar chief executive, Andy Marinos, said:  <quote> “While we witness the daring and exciting brand of rugby played by southern hemisphere teams on a regular basis, last year's Rugby World Cup well and truly showcased that skill and flair to the rest of the world.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “Now, we are thrilled to announce that two of our national teams, Argentina and Australia, will be returning to the United Kingdom some 12 months later to contest what will be a historic chapter of the Rugby Championship.” </quote> 

Tickets, which start at £45 for adults, will go on general sale later this week. The Rugby Football Union chief executive, Ian Ritchie, added:  <quote> “We're delighted to have the Rugby Championship coming to Twickenham Stadium this October, the first time that one of its matches has been played in England.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “After welcoming so many teams and fans here during the Rugby World Cup, it's fantastic to be able to open our doors again. We were treated to a great match between these two teams in the Rugby World Cup and I am sure that it's set to be another high-octane encounter in the autumn.” </quote> 