The animals have been used by Virgin Media for over a year to help lay cables for its broadband service, the company has disclosed.

The ferrets wear jackets fitted with a microchip which is able to analyse any breaks or damage in the underground network.

The development could help increase broadband in current Internet  <quote> "dead zones" </quote> , giving access to inaccessible places, and and helping bridge the 'digital divide'.

Currently most broadband technologies are limited to short distances from central switching offices so most companies focus on cities to keep costs down.
ADVERTISING

The government has set a target of universal broadband access of 2Mbps by 2012. Analysts estimate that the cost of running fibre optic cables to all parts of the country could cost anywhere between £10 billion and £25 billion. A 50p levy of every phone line in the country has been proposed to cover costs.
Related Articles

Classic April Fool TV news 31 Mar 2010

Currently around two million homes, one in 10 households, are without broadband.

Jon James, director of broadband for Virgin Media, said:  <quote> "For hundreds of years, ferrets have helped humans in various jobs. Our decision to use them is due to their strong nesting instinct, their long, lean build and inquisitive nature, and for their ability to get down holes. We initially kept the trial low-key as we wanted to assess how well the ferrets fitted into our operations before revealing this enterprising scheme." </quote> 

Ferrets have been used to run cables through hard-to-reach places in the past.

Events organisers in London used them to run television and sound cables outside Buckingham Palace for the wedding of the Prince of Wales and the late Diana, Princess of Wales.

A similar system was used to lay the cables for televised coverage for the Party in the Park concert in Greenwich at the Millennium.

With their long lean build ferrets have historically been sent down holes to chase rodents and rabbits out of their burrows.

Caesar Augustus is thought to have sent ferrets to the Balearic Islands to control the rabbit plagues in 6BC.
