Four big ties to cheer Tottenham ahead of the clash with Real Madrid



European giants Real Madrid stand in Tottenham' s way of a place in the Champions League semi-final, a team with huge experience of this competition, having won it on no less than nine occasions.



But they aren't completely infallible, Spurs will be buoyed by three memorable occasions the Spaniards have been booted out of the competition by English opponents in the latter stages.



And the last time they played at this stage of the competition they won handsomely - even if it was 49 years ago!

Waiting game: Tottenham have reasons to be positive ahead of the clash with Real Madrid

Sportsmail takes a look at four reason for Spurs fans to be positive ahead of Tuesday night's clash at the Bernabeu.



Real Madrid v Arsenal (last 16, 2006, agg 0-1)

Madrid had never lost to English opposition at home, and with Arsenal stumbling through their final season at Highbury few back the Gunners to produce an upset.



Thierry Henry had other ideas. Minutes into the second half of the first leg in Spain, the Frenchman's magnificent solo goal, slaloming through four challenges and smashing a low drive into the bottom corner, handed the Londoners the advantage.

In London a fortnight later, they certainly rode their luck at times but held on. They went on to reach the final where the lost to Barcelona.



Gunned down: Arsenal saw off Real over two legs in 2006

Real Madrid v Liverpool (last 16, 2009, agg 5-0)

The Galactico project may have been confined to history, but the Real side so thoroughly outclassed by Liverpool was still packed full of the world's brightest talent.



After executing the perfect away performance - defensively watertight and nicking a late goal through Yossi Benayoun - Liverpool humiliated Madrid on one of the most magical European nights at Anfield.



Torres took on the role of tormentor-in-chief, summoning all his angst towards Real build up from years in their city shadow with Atletico, opening the scoring and having a hand in a Steven Gerrard brace. Andrea Dossena then added a fourth late on.



Brace yourself: Gerrard is joined by Fernando Torres in celebrating the destruction of Real

Manchester United v Real Madrid (semi-final, 1968, agg 4-3)

George Best's solitary strike at Old Trafford had given United the most slender of advantages ahead of the second leg of their epic semi-final. It counted for little in Spain with Real were simply irresistable, a hark back to their all-conquering team of the 1950s.



United, though, showed the grit endemic in a club who'd had to rebuild following the Munich air disaster 10 years earlier.



Second half goals from David Sadler and Bill Foulkes secured a memorable draw on the night for Sir Matt Busby's men, who went on to lift the trophy at Wembley that year.



Simply the Best: George slams home United's winner at the semi-final stage in 1968

SPURS HAVE BEEN HERE BEFORE ...



Dukla Prague 1-0 Tottenham (last-16, 1962, agg 4-2)

Only once before have Tottenham dined at Europe's top table, in 1962 after the class of ‘61 had become the first team in Britain to win a league and cup double.



Defeat in the first leg in Prague, thanks to Rudolf Kucera's solitary strike, was rendered meaningless within a quarter of an hour of the return at a snow-covered White Hart Lane courtesy of Bobby Smith and Dave Mackay (right).

