ROYAL wedding fever is in the air. Paul Tibbey and Mark Sims musical charting the ups and downs and ins and outs of the infamous royal threesome, Charles, Camilla and Diana, couldn’t be better timed.

While some might argue that its irreverence is inappropriate, few, I think, would deny its place in the spotlight.

Told as a fairytale by a beige-suited observer to a keen monarchist, this is a bright and breezy trawl through the origins of Charles’s not-too-dangerous liaison with Camilla (who referred to each other as Fred and Gladys) right through his marriage to Diana, ending in her death and his final marriage to his divorced longterm mistress.

On a stage the size of a cigarette packet above the Landor pub in Clapham, the enthusiastic cast of seven strut and sing, delivering the razor-sharp lyrics in a variety of musical styles from affecting romantic ballads to music hall knees-ups with a Cha Cha Cha thrown in to leaven the mix.

There is no set to speak of and the two musicians, a drummer and a pianist, sit cramped in the corner. But the spirit of the enterprise is consistent and the energy never flags. For a show that bills itself as a musical comedy it is also surprisingly sensitive and occasionally moving. Much of the wit is contained within the lyrics.

Charles bemoans the expectations of him:  <quote> “How can I be what others aren’t/Hamlet mixed with Cary Grant” </quote>  and later describes Diana as:  <quote> “Like a nurse but not so starchy/Mother Theresa in Versace.” </quote> 

The show occasionally betrays its budget of goodwill and peanuts and not all the cast can deliver the sophisticated songs with the same confidence as Ruth James’ wonderful Queen or Camilla Simson’s Camilla but the thing still pours off the stage with infectious energy.

Diana fans might find it errs on the side of sympathy for Camilla but there is an undercurrent of genuine humanity here that sufficient to make you feel the genuine dilemma faced by the overgrown adolescent Charles (James Edwards), the love of his life and the unfortunate girl who was lured into a marriage that turned out to be a menage a trois.

The girlie exchange between the dead Diana (Emily Woodward) and the about-to-be-married Camilla plus the use of The Goons to highlight the cultural gap between Charles and Diana are truly inspired.

What could so easily have been an amusing but vacuous satire on the monarchy turns out to be a genuinely humane and immensely witty entertainment that defies its anorexic budget.

While it’s not always the case that inside every small show there’s a big one struggling to get out, it is certainly true of this. Get a bus to Clapham now.
