The forward is rated as having an outside chance of facing the Germans at Old Trafford as United try to turn round a 2-1 first-leg deficit.

Rooney, who has already started work on a water treadmill and exercise bike since suffering minor ankle ligament damage against Bayern last Tuesday, is determined to be involved in the Champions League quarter-final second leg, despite being ruled out for two to three weeks by Ferguson last Friday.

Ferguson has made it clear he will not jeopardise Rooney's long-term fitness by risking him against Bayern unless he is convinced that the forward is fit. However, the United manager is prepared to leave the door open should his recovery continue to gather pace.

The injury sustained by the player following a challenge by Bayern's Mario Gomez is not as serious as United first feared. The club are still publicly insisting that the Manchester derby on April 17 is his likeliest return date, but it is understood that optimism is growing that he could be fit enough to play some part against Bayern.

Although Ferguson will be braced for the inevitable accusations that he would be placing Rooney's World Cup participation at risk should he call on the forward, the Scot will only be concerned with the ramifications for the player and United.

With United still chasing the Premier League title, Ferguson will not gamble on Rooney's fitness and risk losing his services for the rest of the season despite the 'win-or-bust' scenario facing his team against Bayern following last week's defeat.

At this stage, with 2½ days until United kick-off against Bayern, Rooney is continuing to wear the protective boot on his right leg and his prospects are rated at no more than 40 per cent.

His progress over the weekend, however, has given United a glimmer of hope that he might yet play some part in a game that could define the club's season.

United's defeat by Chelsea on Saturday exposed the gaping chasm left by Rooney's absence.

Without Rooney, United simply lack an X-factor. Dimitar Berbatov, their £30.75 million club record signing, was all effort and determination against Chelsea, but could not provide the inspiration that comes naturally to his injured team-mate.

Two glancing headers were directed wide of goal by the Bulgarian and a fluffed volley in the closing stages summed up his frustrating afternoon.

The Chelsea manager Carlo Ancelotti wisely played it safe before the game by insisting United would be just as dangerous without Rooney, however the Italian was more candid after his team's victory.

Ancelotti said:  <quote> "Manchester United are not the same team without Wayne Rooney in it. Rooney is a fantastic player who is difficult to replace with another player.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "Berbatov is a good player but Rooney is totally different. Rooney can sometimes come back to receive the ball and use it for all the team and then he can attack in any direction.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "He is an unbelievable player. He and Berbatov have different characteristics." </quote> 

Manchester United captain Gary Neville has warned that the club must prepare to face Bayern without their talisman.

Neville said:  <quote> "Over the past six to eight months, Wayne has been prolific for us and his form has been outstanding.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "We never want to lose any player of his stature, particularly at this stage of the season, but if you rely on just one player, you won't be successful.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "What happened last week is not something we can think too much about. We have to be quite hard about it and focus on getting the fit players ready for the next game.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "Going back to the 1999 Champions League final, we were missing Roy Keane and Paul Scholes, and last year we had Darren Fletcher missing in the Champions League final, so we have had players missing in crucial periods before. These are things we have to overcome." </quote> 