Disney is on the heels of releasing more information about their in-park Tomorrowland promotions, and we've got the scoop. Our sources have leaked us a Disney Parks Blog post that will go up later today, April 1st:

Sneak Peek: New Food and Beverage Novelty Items to Celebrate Disney's Tomorrowland at Disney Parks!

by Linda Ramirez, Disney Parks Novelty Food and Beverage, Lead Communications Coordinator, Manager

Ready to ‘launch' up your next Lunch at the Disneyland Resort? Here's a peek at some of the new food and beverage items coming to Disneyland park and Disney California Adventure park to celebrate the new Tomorrowland movie (in theaters May 22nd), and I couldn't wait to share it with Disney Parks Blog readers.



First, inspired by young Frank Walker's jetpack adventure in the film, try the Double dog FRANK-furter Jetpack at Award Wieners in Disney California Adventure park. This double all-beef hot dog is served on a ‘wheatfield' bun (just like in the movie), with an ‘exhaust' of wasabi ketchup and dijon-aioli infused mustard, in a souvenir Disney Parks authentic, collectable, exclusive 'jetpack' bun holder.



You'll need something to wash down all that FRANK-furter fun, so we've designed this new souvenir collectible sipper to enjoy on all your ‘Tomorrowland' adventures. If you love George Clooney as much as I do, I suggest getting your drink in the Frank Walker souvenir sipper, perfect to keep your little one's ‘fueled' up for action. The  <quote> "Frank Walker souvenir sipper" </quote>  is a great value at $19.64 and includes a single soft drink fill at time of purchase.

The designs, by Mark Jennison, Creative Marketing Lead of Novelty Merchandise Foods Synergy and Products,  <quote> "Guest research shows that our guests will have a great response to these Tomorrowland collectible sippers and food products. After seeing the movie (in theaters on May 22nd), we know guests will want to 'jetpack' over to their favorite Disney Parks' resorts' food and or beverage destination and enjoy these limited edition products that show their #DisneySide." </quote> 

Our Walt Disney World guests can enjoy these select items at vending carts in Frontierland at Magic Kingdom Park.

You wont need a special pin to enjoy these new food and beverage offers, but hurry - these limited time offerings have a 100% probability of disappearing from the future soon.

Which of these new #FuturisticFun items will you be ‘transporting' your Disney Parks adventure with?
