 <quote> "Are We Done Yet?" </quote> 

A squabbling family moves into a suburban money pit. With Ice Cube, Nia Long, John C. McGinley. Director: Steve Carr (1:32). PG: Language, slapstick violence, crude humor. At area theaters.

Everything you need to know about Steve Carr's grating comedy  <quote> "Are We Done Yet?" </quote>  is right there in the title. It's what the actors seem to be thinking, and it's what every audience member over 9 will be asking.

Which means the title is the only thing Carr got exactly right.

Though the opening credits optimistically announce that the movie is based on the classic 1948 comedy  <quote> "Mr. Blandings Builds His Dream House," </quote>  the real inspiration for this tiresome retread was the $98 million made by its equally obnoxious predecessor,  <quote> "Are We There Yet?" </quote> 

In the last movie, bachelor Nick Persons (Ice Cube) reluctantly baby-sat the bratty kids (Aleisha Allen, Philip Bolden) of his girlfriend Suzanne (Nia Long). By now, Nick and Suzanne are married, and the whole clan is crammed into his tiny apartment. With Suzanne expecting twins, the peaceful space of the suburbs is starting to look pretty good. So when aggressive real estate agent Chuck (John C. McGinley) shows them a gorgeous country house, Nick eagerly signs on.

Then the roof starts to leak. The power shorts out. Workmen, and their overexposed body parts, invade every room. And somewhere between the rabid raccoons and the dry rot it dawns on Nick that Chuck has his hand in each disaster. He is not only the local realtor, but also, according to the script's lazy logic, the only contractor, electrician, animal wrangler and midwife around. And everyone else loves the guy; only Nick can see what an evil menace he really is.

Actually, we see it too, if only because McGinley's pop-eyed performance would put a season's worth of Easter hams to shame. (Although perhaps he's just trying to compensate for Ice Cube's evident lack of enthusiasm, which may stem from the dawning awareness that he has turned himself into Tim Allen.)

After allowing sadistic violence and whining children to invade his movie like a horde of termites, Carr tries to put one over on us by tacking on a sentimental ending. But as any homeowner could have told him, you can't disguise a weak foundation with a cheap finish.
