DirectX 12 enables compute cards to take on the 390X & Titan Z...

For the last decade the world of Graphics Cards has seen the Red and Green teams competing but it seems 2015 will see us gain a third colour as Intel finally enters the fray. On the back this rather monumental announcement today, we look into what a full RGB colour gamut gives us.

Intel first mentioned plans entering the discrete graphics card market several years ago but alas its Larrabee silicon never crystallised properly. Hamstrung by design and poor software, Intel GPUs just could not render polygons the same rate as AMD or Nvidia. This left the Blue team with a product which while competitive for general compute purposes (and released as the Xeon Fi) was as appealing to geeks as a Homeopathic A&E. However with Microsoft's compute focused DirectX 12 advancing steadily towards its release date and Intel's experience in integrated graphics drivers, this has come to matter less: the software has come to match Intel's hardware.

Not that the hardware side has sat still either. Intel fabs have already pressed their first 14nm engineering samples, when this is paired off with the ‘decap ring' last seen in AMD's HD 4890, the upper hand is entirely on the other foot. We don't know a great deal, in fact performance hasn't even been reported. However from the press release tomorrow we already know that the basic model of ‘Knights Landing' packs a whopping 72 Atom cores operating in parallel at upwards of 1.3 GHz. This offers up 3-4 Petaflops of power; 150% more than the theTitan Z, possibly more than the AMD 390X. Of course with a release date set for the tail end of 2015 Intel's KN architecture will be up against Nvidia's Pascal and AMD's GCN 3.0. Perhaps these numbers won't look quite so amazing once the release date rolls around.

Of the two models, the above 'Five' models (i5, g5?) have more of a standard layout, with a pair of HDMI ports and a dual link DVI port. In a improbably unconventional move, the prototype 'Seven' cards don't output video directly at all, which pays dividends for cooling, with a lot more slot area available to exhaust the blower fan. Typically Knights Landing Sevens will use the latent output capabilities of integrated GPUs through interleaving two reserved PCIe lanes to offload a video stream to the iGPU frame buffer by stack overflow.

The press brief notes that over 80% of current enthusiast systems have <quote>  ‘at least one' digital output” </quote> , but does also mention the planned alternative single-slot ‘outboard' with video connectors, in both PCIe and the newest Vesa Localbus flavours. Curiously the same presentation suggested that AMD may have a part to play: the 80% figure was broken down by chipset and included both Intel and AMD designs. Although many would have called such Intel-AMD cooperation completely impossible yesterday, it makes a kind of sense to us today. This will be part of AMD's movement towards open standards and could mark a serious, concerted attempt aimed at dislodging Nvidia from the top spot... or it could be complete FUD.

Time will tell.
