It looks a lot like a trade war.

On Monday, China imposed tariffs on 128 American products imported into the country, including wine, pork and steel pipes.

The next day, the Trump administration took a direct hit at China, announcing tariffs on about $50 billion worth of imports like flat-screen TVs, medical devices and aircraft parts.

The day after that, China upped the ante. And on Thursday, President Trump said the United States should go further, suggesting additional tariffs on $100 billion of Chinese goods.

With each move, the world’s two biggest economies have appeared more than willing to one-up the other to protect their interests, as the Trump administration tries to enact policies to help American workers and the Chinese government tries to become a global leader across a variety of cutting-edge industries.

The U.S.-China Trade Conflict: How We Got to This Point

American companies want a level playing field with their Chinese counterparts. China wants to build its industries into sophisticated global competitors. This week, both countries demonstrated a willingness to escalate trade tensions to defend their positions.
The Trump administration is fighting back against China’s trade tactics.

American companies have complained that they don’t have a level playing field with their Chinese counterparts. The Chinese government provides big subsidies for its homegrown players, as part of a broader state-led plan. The country has taken advantage of gaps in international rules or hasn’t bothered to follow them.

China has been particularly aggressive in the high-tech realm. It has forced American companies to hand over technology or form joint ventures, in exchange for access to China, the world’s second largest economy. Some American companies contend that Chinese players have stolen their secrets outright.

Loading imported soybeans at a port in the Chinese city of Nantong. China struck back Wednesday at American tariffs placed on its goods with tariffs of its own. Credit CHINATOPIX, via Associated Press
China is defending its industrial policy and economic power.

One area of concern for the United States is China’s ambitious agenda called Made in 2025. Under that plan, Beijing aims to dominate cutting-technologies like semiconductors, artificial intelligence and electric cars. China is putting huge resources behind this industrial policy, which it sees as crucial to its economic future and its national security.

Both countries are getting ever more protective of these industries. In the United States, regulators are increasingly blocking Chinese companies from buying American assets, as Congress considers beefing up its rules around foreign acquisitions.

China may not stop tariffs as it remains in a retaliatory crouch. Some of the biggest American companies have operations there, and Beijing could begin freezing the companies out.

In many ways, the United States and China have been waging a cold war over technology — one that is now escalating and threatening to spill over into the global economy.
But trade wars aren’t easy to win.

Stock markets have waffled over the prospect that a trade war between the United States and China could crimp growth in the global economy — or disrupt the worldwide supply chain.

And many of China’s tariffs, including those on soybeans and automobiles, take direct aim at the farm belt and manufacturing hubs, both big bases for President Trump.

If the tit-for-tat conflict intensifies, it not only could hurt the economy, but the entire global trading system. The World Trade Organization, which governs the rules of trade, looks increasingly vulnerable. It is part of a broader assault on the post-World War II order that has promoted democratic ideals and international trade, as a way to prevent broader conflicts.
