No one should be surprised or appalled by the Institute for Fiscal Studies' calculations that families with children will lose around £500 through the latest tax and benefit changes. They should instead blame Gordon Brown.

In an intentionally Fabianesque move, one of the worst ideas Brown pursued was to set about trying to make as many people as possible dependent on the state.

During the reign of New Labour he focused especially on pulling families with children into the benefits system. First he introduced the Working Families Tax Credit, then increased it. And, along with child premiums in income support, he increased Child Tax Credits and Child Benefit. He went further, including families without children by changing Working Families Tax Credits to Working Tax Credits.

By 2010 the state was the main financial provider for around a third of all UK households. Brown had succeeded in his goal – making it political dynamite to touch these subsidies.

We must not forget there is a reason government spending got to more than 50% of GDP and we amassed a national debt of around £1 trillion.

According to the Institute for Fiscal Studies, under New Labour families with children where neither partner worked were 16% better off as a result of tax and benefit changes; single pensioners by about 10%. This compares with a single earner couple with no children who saw a decline of around 5%. A couple with children and one partner in work (earning less than £100,000) was better off by around 6%.

It was pensioners and those with children who Brown concentrated on. So it is not surprising that in trying to wean us off debt-fuelled spending the government is reducing the amount of money families with children receive. What is more surprising is that the government is not looking at reducing the benefits pensioners get, including winter fuel allowance and free TV licences, given the extent to which their benefits rose under New Labour.

We need to take a step back from this all though. The media and the Coalition have been drawn into pitting various groups of society against each other with static analysis that does not take into account how benefit and tax changes alter our behaviour – for example, whether they make us spend more or less, take a job or accept a promotion or decide to employ someone. It is change on this scale that makes the biggest difference to people's household incomes.

The big picture is that the Coalition needs to sort out the economy, rebalance the books and wean us all off state dependency. It is families with children who have most to gain here. Surely we want future generations to grow up in a country with jobs, great schools and hospitals and without inheriting debt at dizzyingly high levels.

They also need to think more carefully about work incentives. Some of the changes being made, such as withdrawing tax credits and increasing the number of hours that must be worked to qualify could act as a disincentive to work. There is a big problem with the creation of high withdrawal rates. reducing benefits across the board would get rid of these and be a way to make work pay.

Brown deliberately widened the benefit net and wanted to make reversing it difficult. It needs doing though and the Coalition needs to courage to see it through.

Ruth Porter is the communications director for the Institute of Economic Affairs