One of the ugly secrets that the US government keeps from the headlines is the fact that most US military dogs who serve our country overseas are killed rather than brought home to America. While it’s not cheap to ship a dog back home, there’s nothing more inhumane in my opinion than to kill a dog that’s served our country. (It’s also a tragedy that so many perfectly good dogs are killed every day in the US in shelters.) As more military cuts are in the pipeline, this situation with working military dogs being put down is likely to get worse.

But one rescue is making a very big difference, and using the latest technology and social media through outlets like Facebook and Twitter to rescue not only working dogs but stray and injured dogs that soldiers find while on duty overseas and who work alongside them. Puppy Rescue Mission has raised over $1.5 million to bring home over 400 of America’s four-legged military personnel and soldiers' best friends. Anna Cannan, founder of Puppy Rescue Mission, talks about how it all started, why technology plays a crucial role in this animal rescue and how you can help in this exclusive interview.

How did your rescue start?

My fiancé Chris, was deployed to and stationed in Afghanistan. A few weeks prior to Chris’s arrival at his combat outpost, a suicide bomber entered the post in the middle of the night. The dogs on the post immediately started barking and took off in pursuit of the bomber. One of the dogs, Rufus, grabbed the bomber’s leg while two other dogs, Target and Sasha, alerted the troops. The suicide bomber blew himself up never making it into the living quarters of the soldiers. Thankfully, all of the soldiers survived the attack with only a few sustaining injuries. Sasha did not survive the attack and was laid to rest at the post. Target, who was badly injured in the blast, was later nursed back to health along with Rufus.

Shortly after the attack, Chris and the other soldiers arrived at the post, where they befriended the dogs as well as Target’s litter of puppies who were only four to five weeks old. Being the animal lover that Chris is, he and some of the other soldiers started taking care of the dogs on the post in their spare time. As time went by, the dogs became very fond of the soldiers who were caring for them. An instant, unbreakable bond formed between the soldiers and the dogs as the dogs provided a sense of normalcy for the soldiers at Chris’s post that rarely exists in a country like Afghanistan.

The soldiers at Chris’s post continued feeding the dogs from their own plates, caring for the dogs on a daily basis but, most of all, treating the dogs as if they were their very own. I didn’t hear from Chris very often but when I did, I could literally hear the smile on Chris’s face as his voice would light up when he would talk about all the dogs at the post. Realizing his time at the post would eventually come to an end, Chris spoke to me about the idea of bringing some of the dogs back to the States.

I began fundraising efforts for the  <quote> "Lucky Seven" </quote>  by selling candles and running an online raffle to help rescue the dogs. Realizing that transporting seven dogs back from Afghanistan was a very expensive process, I decided to start a Facebook page which became known as  <quote> "Puppy Rescue Mission." </quote>  Thanks to friends and family, we were able to raise the funds for these seven dogs, who are all happily residing in the US today - and the requests flooded in from there.

What types of rescues do you do with the military animals?

We will help any US soldier that outreaches to us to help them bring dogs (and cats), from any deployment region home. Many of our rescues have been from Afghanistan, but we've also helped soldiers reunite with their battle buddies from Africa, Iraq, Kuwait, even Italy.

Can you provide us some statistics in terms of how many success stories you've had thus far?

The majority of our stories are successes, and the stories are all heartwarming. How a soldier rescues or bonds their furry friend ranges from tragic to sweet. We've had dogs that were near death, and freshly born puppies who were thankfully never fully exposed to life in a war zone. But the defining and shared story is that one soldier and one puppy creates a bond, and they save each other. The pup gives the soldier focus and hope when deployed, and the solider provides the pup a safe place, and eventually a forever home and a very different life then they would have ever known. It's therapeutic for our returning troops to bring a positive part of their war experience home with them.

There have been a few tragic stories as well – where we cannot rescue the pup in time and they are tragically taken, or they fall ill prior to deportation due to the lack of veterinarian care. They can definitely be casualties of war.

How much money have you raised as a non-profit since launch?

We've raised more than $1.5 million and have rescued more than 400 battle buddies. The amazing thing is that we have raised most of these funds through Facebook, where we started, by posting the letters from each soldier along with photos of the soldier and their battle buddy. The generosity of people is astonishing, especially when they read about the personal experiences and become to feel vested. We provide a 30-day window for fundraising for each soldier-pup, and often it takes only 3 to 5 days to complete the fundraising.

What does it cost typically to get a dog home from the Middle East?

The average cost to rescue a dog from the Middle East is $3,500. This covers everything from the cost of the dog's vaccinations, transport from the base to the shelter, transport to the nearby airport as well as airfare from Afghanistan to the dog's respective new home. To date, we have raised more than $1.5 million to rescue more than 400 dogs (and cats).

My wife runs a rescue and said the US military has been known to put down dogs rather than spend money to bring them home. Is this something that still happens if these dogs aren't rescued?

This is an unfortunate truth, but thankfully Puppy Rescue Mission has been able to save some of these battle companions as well. We are currently fundraising for two US military dogs in Kuwait. Sarge is a US military service dogs that was left behind. Ned is the pup of a US military service dog left behind. We are happy to shed a light on this issue, and inspire people to help get these military companions home to US soil. When these stories are brought to our attention, we will help.

Can you talk about the bond that develops between military working dogs and their handlers?

The bond that is created between deployed soldiers and the animals they befriend (and often serve alongside), is indescribable. We recently rescued a mother and son from Afghanistan, Sammy and Marvin. Sammy has twice been slit in the throat and severely abused by locals – only to be rescued, both times, by US soldiers. The funds for Sammy and Marvin were raised in just days on Facebook, and they recently arrived in the US this month. It's truly heartwarming when we receive the rescue – for our volunteers, Facebook donors and followers, and the soldiers. Their soldier recently emailed to us after receiving photos of their stateside arrival:  <quote> "I'm sitting here with a grin from ear to ear and tears rolling down, (gotta be the smoke in the air). Wow doesn't cut it. What you are doing is repairing shattered lives, not just for the animals but for the soldiers here. You don't talk about it because you put it way down deep where you can function like a machine but 'It is mans compassion to all creatures which first makes him a man' Albert Einstein. Thank you for letting people here feel human again!" </quote>  There is no greater reward than receiving emails like this.