Pamela Mangru's killer stabbed her three times in the throat, turning the knife and leaving a hole, from which she bled to death, relatives said yesterday.

The woman, who was murdered on Wednesday night by her lover, had some ten stab wounds about the body.

Relatives of the woman yesterday told Stabroek News that the pathologist who performed the post-mortem examination told them she had sustained around ten stab wounds to her body with more than one to her throat.

 <quote> “It look like he bore she about three times to her throat and he turn the knife because there is like a hole in she throat and the doctor say is from deh she bleed to death,” </quote>  a relative of the woman said yesterday.

Meanwhile, the police are yet to arrest 31-year-old Devon Limerick, who calmly walked out of the New Road, Vreed-en-Hoop home after knifing the woman, who would have celebrated her 40th birthday yesterday. Reports are that the police visited most of her relatives but all said they did not know of the man's whereabouts.  Stabroek News was told that the police received information that the man may have headed to Berbice and they are working on the tip.

According to the relatives, after the man knifed the woman he emptied her handbag of about $15,000 and also took off her jewellery.

Mangru, a mother of four, had only recently escaped years of abuse from her husband, when she struck up a relationship with Limerick. Relatives said the relationship was doomed from the inception but Mangru continued with the man despite their advice. Limerick was said to be very possessive and would follow the woman wherever she went and if he could not do that he made sure he called her constantly on her cellular phone.

Her daughter Roxanne had told Stabroek News that the man was freeloading off her mother as she needed nothing from him and operated her own business. He, on the other hand, had a low-paying job with two young children to support. The woman had asked him to leave on several occasions but he said he would never leave her.

On the night in question, they were overheard arguing and some time after, Limerick was seen leaving the home after he had padlocked both the door and the gate. The woman's landlord, suspecting something was amiss, contacted relatives and the police and when the door was kicked down by the lawmen the woman's bloodied body was discovered.

The woman lived with her two eldest children and Limerick and operated a CD shop at the Vreed-en-Hoop stelling. Her other two children live with their father.
