Samsung researchers have developed a new method of synthesising graphene, which they claim could accelerate the commercialisation of the so-called 'miracle material', for use in electronic devices.

Graphene is one of the thinnest, lightest, strongest and most conductive materials know to man, consisting of a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a honeycomb structure. Its versatility means that it can potentially support a wide variety of applications in electronics, including flexible displays, wearables and other next-generation electronic devices.

Working with Sungkyungkwan University's School of Advanced Materials Science and Engineering, Samsung's Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT) has uncovered a new method of synthesising graphene without damaging its electric and mechanical properties.

In the past, researchers have found that multi-crystal synthesis – the process of synthesising small graphene particles to produce large-area graphene – deteriorated the electric and mechanical properties of the material, limiting its application range and making it difficult to commercialise.

The new method involves synthesising large-area graphene into a single crystal on a semiconductor, while maintaining its electric and mechanical properties. By developing a method for growing a single crystal graphene into a large area, the researchers claim they could displace the tech industry's reliance on silicon.

 <quote> "This is one of the most significant breakthroughs in graphene research in history,” </quote>  said the laboratory leaders at SAIT's Lab.  <quote> “We expect this discovery to accelerate the commercialisation of graphene, which could unlock the next era of consumer electronic technology." </quote> 

The research results will be published in the April 4 issue of Science Magazine and ScienceExpress.

Engineers around the world have invested heavily in research for the commercialisation of graphene. Experiments have revealed a multitude of other potential uses, including accelerating future high-speed Internet, manufacturing fast-charging batteries and improving the speed and density of printable electronics.

Last year, the UK government invested a total of £21.5 million in the commercialisation of graphene, which was originally developed in Britain by Andre Geim and Konstantin Novoselov from the University of Manchester, and is widely regarded as the natural successor to silicon as a semiconductor in modern technology.

Chancellor George Osborne said at the time that the investment – which was split between the Universities of Cambridge, London Imperial, Durham, Manchester, Exeter and Royal Holloway – would help take graphene  <quote> "from the British laboratory to the British factory floor" </quote> .