We have some very exciting news today, Tributes! Earlier today, Six Flags and Lionsgate announced that ‘The World of Panem,' a Hunger Games amusement park, is a go! ‘The World of Panem' will be a a new addition to Six Flags Great Adventure, located in Jackson, NJ. Check out the rest of the press release below!

GRAND PRAIRIE, Texas, March 31, 2014 /PRNewswire/ — Six Flags Entertainment Corporation (NYSE: SIX) and Lionsgate (NYSE: LGF) today announced plans for an expansion to Six Flags Great Adventure in Jackson, New Jersey. Six Flags Great Adventure, already the world's largest theme park, will be making room for a new addition to the park, based off of the wildly popular Hunger Games franchise.

Scheduled to open in June 2016, The World of Panem will allow guests to experience the post-apocalyptic setting of District 12, and the futuristic setting of the Capitol. Guests will be transported from the District 12 area to the Capitol area via monorail. The new area will bring to life some of the experiences and places found in District 12, including the Hall of Justice building in Town Square, and the Avenue of the Tributes in the Capitol, as seen in the books and films. The World of Panem will offer brand-new adventures for fans and theme park guests from around the world.

To bring Panem to life, Six Flags is working very closely with Lionsgate and the production design team from the Hunger Games films.

Planned attractions coming to The World of Panem include ‘District 12 Mine Train' rollercoaster, ‘Capitol Tours,' and ‘The Hunger Games' themselves. Three arenas are to be constructed for the fight-to-the- death styled competitions. Guests wishing to take part in the Games will be required to sign waivers. Six Flags Entertainment Corporation and Lionsgate will not be held responsible for any deaths inside the arenas.

Hunger Games themed shops and restaurants will also be included in The World of Panem, including The Mellark Bakery restaurant, and the The Hob gift shop.

More details on The World of Panem will be released over time.

 <quote> “We are extremely excited to be introducing the world to Panem at Six Flags Great Adventure. The biggest amusement park just keeps getting bigger and better!” </quote>  said CEO of Six Flags Entertainment Corporation Jim Reid Anderson.

 <quote> “Bringing the Games to life offers a more immersive experience for the fans of the movies and books. Fans will get to experience the hardships Katniss had to go through while living in Panem,” </quote>  said Jon Feltheimer, CEO of Lionsgate Entertainment.

 <quote> “Our goal is to give fans of ‘The Hunger Games' the experience of a lifetime. These fans dream about going to Hunger Games universe, and now, thanks to our friends at Six Flags, they can,” </quote>  said Kate Winn, Senior Vice President, Consumer Products.

I honestly am at a loss for words right now. I don't know whether to be excited or scared. I think it will be cool to see the architecture or Panem, however it doesn't feel right to step into such a horrible world. What do you guys think? Make sure to voice your opinion in the comments!
