A void in their lives ... thousands of the faithful gather in St Peter's Square to pay their respects to Pope John Paul. Photo: Reuters

On the Pope's death, the Prefect of the Papal Household, Archbishop James Harvey, informs the Camerlengo, the Chamberlain of the Church, who must verify his death. No autopsy is performed.

The Camerlengo, the Spanish Cardinal Eduardo Martinez Somalo, 78, tells the Dean of the College of Cardinals, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, 77, who tells the rest of the college, the ambassadors accredited to the Holy See, and the heads of state.

Next, the Camerlengo destroys the Pope's fisherman's ring with a hammer, and also the die used to make lead seals for apostolic letters.

He takes over administration of the Holy See's money and property, with the help of three cardinal assistants. Meanwhile, the Camerlengo seals the Pope's rooms, arranges the funeral and the conclave to elect his successor. The Pope leaves instructions in his will for his funeral, held three to four days after his death, which allows time for heads of state and the 120 voting members of the College of Cardinals to get to Rome.

THE INTERREGNUM

The period between the death of the Pope and the election of his successor lasts two to three weeks, during which the church is run by the college. The most important person during the interregnum is the Camerlengo. The cardinals hold daily meetings that are presided over by the Dean of the College of Cardinals. When the Pope dies all cardinals who are heads of Vatican departments cease to hold office except the Camerlengo and the Major Penitentiary, since this cardinal deals with confessional matters, and the idea is that forgiveness should always be available.

During this period the cardinals spend a lot of time getting to know each other, and drawing up a profile of the kind of man they think the church needs as the next Pope.

Cardinals older than 80 can participate in these discussions, but they are excluded as soon as their colleagues enter the conclave.

There was deep resentment among some cardinals when Paul VI ruled in 1970 that they could not vote in papal elections, but the wisdom of the decision is now accepted.