Vegas Golden Knights Uniform Leaks, Features LED Lights

C'mon, we all knew this wouldn't stay hidden forever.

Thanks for a very reliable inside source we have gotten an *exclusive* first look at the new uniform for the Vegas Golden Knights, the NHL's newest franchise set to hit the ice for the first time this fall.

The story from the source is that while walking past a colleague's desk they noticed the official stylesheet featuring the Golden Knights uniforms was open and quickly took a snapshot. I can't say much about the source but I can say that knowing where they are employed, they would certainly be in a position to come across this.

Here's the photo they sent in:



Okay so first things, grey jersey with gold sleeves, wordmark across the waist which, okay, I guess… some sort of pattern on the sleeve stripes… wait, what's the note next to the mockup?

Closer inspection:



It's a little blurry but our source tells us it's basically saying there's red stars on the sleeves but you can only see them  <quote> “when LEDs active” </quote> .

Hey… it's Vegas, baby! Let's put some lights on this jersey!

Another look at the jersey:

So what can we gather from this? It looks like Adidas is working on some crazy hi-tech stuff here. Maybe the LEDs are activated remotely and blink after every Vegas goal? Imagine during the pre-game introductions with the lights turned down and all the players jerseys blinking? Now that would be pretty awesome, and very Las Vegas.

This would obviously be a first-of-it's-kind anywhere in professional sports, let alone hockey. If they're planning this for the Vegas team, who knows what other new things we could see for their league-wide uniform roll out next season.

Unfortunately no shot of the road jersey, or the back of the uniform but I think this gives us a good idea of what to expect of the set once the new season starts, seeing how it's already April 1st we really shouldn't have to wait too much longer to see these in action.

Goodnight everybody.
