NASHVILLE, Tenn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Nashville-based Uniguest (www.uniguest.com), the hospitality industry’s leading provider of secure and fully managed guest-facing technologies, completed two acquisitions today in a bold move to grow its hospitality market leadership and expand its opportunity in associated markets requiring customer or guest connectivity.

Nashville-based Uniguest acquired Ascension Software, Inc. and the hospitality business center division of Eleven, Inc. Each of these companies bring synergistic technologies and expertise to the Uniguest portfolio, and supports the company’s long-term strategy of providing innovative technology solutions to consumer-facing industries.

 <quote> “These additions to our business enhance Uniguest’s portfolio of services for secure managed computing and expand our customer base among major hotel brands and locations, solidifying our position as the industry’s leading technology provider and advancing our strategy of building a leveragable platform for diversifying into verticals like business services, urban living, financial services, retail and healthcare,” </quote>  said Joseph P. Morgan, Jr., CEO of Uniguest.

With these acquisitions, Uniguest has more than 25,000 managed technology installations in more than 60 countries.

 <quote> “Today we have added tremendous talent while expanding our customer base, technology portfolio and ongoing innovation capabilities,” </quote>  Morgan said.  <quote> “Collectively, this positions Uniguest to be a single-source provider of technologies that, together, move us closer to realizing our vision of providing the perfect guest and customer experience.” </quote> 

About Uniguest

Uniguest is the leading provider of secure fully managed technology solutions to the hospitality industry, backed by world-class service delivery and 24/7/365 support. Uniguest’s solutions include secure public-use computers, static and interactive digital signage, kiosks and purposed tablets. Uniguest manages more than 25,000 guest-facing technology devices in nearly 15,000 client locations across more than 60 countries for many of the world’s most recognizable brands. For more information, visit www.uniguest.com or email carol.merry@fahlgren.com.