Even though we know there's a Tron sequel currently underway at Disney, there's still a lot of secrecy surrounding the plot. All we really know for certain is that both Jeff Bridges and Bruce Boxleitner are involved and that they'll send a new generation inside the computer to fight some nameless threat. Well now we have a name for that threat: It's Skynet.

Terminator Salvation director McG let the whole thing slip early yesterday to the Herald Sun Times Weekly while promoting his new film at ShoWest saying,  <quote> “You've never seen anything like what we're doing with Terminator and John Connor. It's so much more than just fighting killer robots this time. Now John not only has to defeat Skynet and its minions in the human world, he'll have to do it inside the computer world as well.” </quote>  When pressed for more information McG revealed,  <quote> “All I can say is that it's a problem so big, John can only solve it by getting a Clu.” </quote> 

For the uninitiated, Clu is the original program used by Flynn in his early attempts to defeat the Master Control Program in the original Tron. Clu failed, and later the Tron program was used to bring about the MCP's destruction. This time, the Master Control Program will actually be Skynet.
10 Accidental Movie Deaths That Scarred Us for Life
What 'The NeverEnding Story' Cast Looks Like Today
17 Actors Who Crossed The Line On Set
8 Movies That Are Ridiculously Overrated

We checked with other sources at Disney who confirmed on the condition of anonymity, that part of the reason for all the secrecy around Tron is that Disney plans to shock the world with a big unveiling at the end of Terminator Salvation. They have a big, secret scene planned after the credits in which John Connor travels back in time to the present day and meets with Flynn, much the same way Tony Stark meets up with Nick Fury at the end of Iron Man. That scene will be the launching point for Tron 2.

Of course since Tron is owned by Disney and Terminator is a Warner Bros. property, making this happen couldn't have been easy. It's the sort of thing that could only happen on a day like this one. Our sources tell us that due to obscure contractual issues Disney actually owns a small piece of the Terminator franchise, in much the same way Fox does (enabling them to make Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles). In order for Warner Bros. to get their permission to make Terminator Salvation without going through another cumbersome legal battle like the one they went through with Watchmen, they were forced to agree to let Disney pair it with the re-launching of Tron as a major franchise.
