Everyone knows Disney has been planning something big, really big, for WonderCon this weekend. The assumption has been that they're doing another Tron: Legacy viral promotion, but tonight when WonderCon opened its doors in San Francisco for a secret, invite-only preview night; they unveiled something foolish. Disney just announced that they've begun work on a big screen version of the legendary Michael Jackson 3D short film, Captain EO, with Eddie Murphy in the title role.

The original Michael Jackson short was shown only in Disney parks and utilized 3D in a way that, at the time, was groundbreaking. Now, with 3D all the rage, it only makes sense that Disney would resurrect their groundbreaking 3D franchise and take it out of the parks and onto the big screen.
8 Female Superhero Movies That Would Dominate The Big Screen
Why Hollywood Won't Cast Tom Welling Anymore
12 Sequels You Didn't Know Were Coming in 2016
Every Single Renewed and Cancelled TV Show of 2016/2017

Captain EO featured Michael Jackson as the captain of a ragtag spaceship crew who defeats the bad guys through the power of music. For Disney, that made Eddie Murphy the only logical choice. Disney CEO John Lasseter explained it to the attending press this way,  <quote> “For us, it was a no brainer. We needed a name who could carry both a movie and a music video. Eddie is one of the few actors in Hollywood who's done both.” </quote>  Eddie Murphy once had a semi-successful singing career, and though it's been a long time since he put out an album, Murphy proved he still has it a few years ago by belting out tunes in Bill Condon's Dreamgirls.

Directing the movie will be Lee Daniels, who recently won acclaim as director of the Oscar nominated movie Precious. Daniels, while an unconventional choice, is hot off an Oscar nomination and basically had his pick of projects. He picked this. Says Daniels,  <quote> “I only made a movie about an obese, abuse victim because that's what it takes to get your foot in the door in Hollywood. But what I've really always want to do is make a movie about a guy defeating space aliens with pop music. For me, this is a dream come true.” </quote> 

Disney should unveil the movie's first poster some time during WonderCon this weekend. According to Lasseter, the film is scheduled to start shooting this summer for a release during the 2011 holiday season.
