TOKYO — This Wednesday, Nikon will be officially announcing the introduction of the amazing new Nikon D4.1 digital SLR, the successor to the award winning D3 and D3x. In a departure from previous digital camera design though, the D4.1 wll use a milestone imaging system with just a single bit sensor to produce vividly stunning images with greater resolution than any previous system.

Back in the 1980's music reproduction entered the digital age with the introduction of the compact disc player. Early players though were hampered by the difficulty of parallel digital decoding data with increasing bit lengths. Sony and Philips successfully created 14-bit digital to analog converters but the quest for 16-bit DAC's proved formidable indeed. In a complete paradigm shift, designers switched to a system that massively oversampled a single bit amplifier, originally looking for a cheaper alternative to the 16-bit route. They soon learned though that when correctly implemented this new system was capable of far surpassing the fidelity of even the best parallel DAC players on the market. In much the same way, USB cables that pass just a single bit at a time at high bit rates have replaced the much slower parallel printer and serial COM port cables in common use just a few years previously. And now Serial ATA drives have outstripped the speed and capacity of the older Parallel ATA (also known as IDE) hard drives we all used to use.

Designed to meet the increasing demands of a burgeoning multitude of photographers of all experience levels who care about creating the best images possible, the D4.1 achieves resolution previously possible only in the best images on photo sharing sites such as flickr — with the operating ease and portability of a compact camera or cell phone. In much the same way as 1-bit technology has revolutionized other digital transmission and reproduction systems, Nikon's new  <quote> "Advanced Photographic Resolution Inference Logic One-bit" </quote>  system does all this with a sensor having just a single pixel.

Spokesperson April Bangusetsu of Nikon's top secret Gansaku Shashinki Institute in Japan explained the technology behind the New Nikon D4.1 DSLR as an outgrowth of Nikon's patents for VR ( <quote> "vibration reduction" </quote> ) lenses. By very, very quickly moving the lens in front of a single pixel sensor the entire image can be captured using the  <quote> "sweet spot" </quote>  of a lens. Just as Nikon's JFET/LBCAST sensor was quickly replaced by FX as an engineering design goal, Nikon anticipates their new one-bit system will become standard on all new cameras.

When asked why Nikon had chosen the name D4.1 rather than the more obvious D4 as the next model in the line of successful D-series bodies, Bangusetsu explained that the  <quote> "point one" </quote>  suffix was used to signify both the new one-bit system as well as Nikon's commitment to be number one in the world of photography.

Bob Johnson, owner of the well known photography website Earthbound Light has said that a person would have to be a fool not to want one of these but praise for the new D4.1 has not been universal. Although Nikon's rugged, functional design employs a state of the art magnesium alloy body,  <quote> "hands on" </quote>  reviews posted on other internet sites have criticized the lack of foam rubber dust seals on the Nikon D4.1. The problem of dust spots in digital photography though has been all but eliminated by the use of Nikon's new single bit sensor. Rumors of a possible brass lens mount proved unfounded after being examined by a student of metallurgy at a local community college. Fears that Nikon might use a plastic film rewind coupling fork in the D4.1 rather than the metal version used on so called  <quote> "professional bodies" </quote>  has also worried some reviewers even though this seems unlikely since digital cameras don't use film.

Upon introduction, users will need to rely on the comprehensive image-editing features of Nikon's own Capture NX2 raw converter to read the new proprietary NEF format produced by the Nikon D4.1 although third party solutions are expected after legal issues are resolved with Nikon's licensing model.
