Seagate Technology plc (NASDAQ:STX) outperformed the technology hardware, storage and peripherals industry on the basis of its ROE – producing a higher 61.07% relative to the peer average of 7.96% over the past 12 months. Though, the impressiveness of STX’s ROE is contingent on whether this industry-beating level can be sustained. Sustainability can be gauged by a company’s financial leverage – the more debt it has, the higher ROE is pumped up in the short term, at the expense of long term interest payment burden. Let me show you what I mean by this. Check out our latest analysis for Seagate Technology

Breaking down Return on Equity

Return on Equity (ROE) is a measure of Seagate Technology’s profit relative to its shareholders’ equity. It essentially shows how much the company can generate in earnings given the amount of equity it has raised. If investors diversify their portfolio by industry, they may want to maximise their return in the Technology Hardware, Storage and Peripherals sector by investing in the highest returning stock. But this can be misleading as each company has different costs of equity and also varying debt levels, which could artificially push up ROE whilst accumulating high interest expense.

Return on Equity = Net Profit ÷ Shareholders Equity

ROE is assessed against cost of equity, which is measured using the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) – but let’s not dive into the details of that today. For now, let’s just look at the cost of equity number for Seagate Technology, which is 11.35%. Given a positive discrepancy of 49.73% between return and cost, this indicates that Seagate Technology pays less for its capital than what it generates in return, which is a sign of capital efficiency. ROE can be broken down into three different ratios: net profit margin, asset turnover, and financial leverage. This is called the Dupont Formula:

Dupont Formula ROE = profit margin × asset turnover × financial leverage ROE = (annual net profit ÷ sales) × (sales ÷ assets) × (assets ÷ shareholders’ equity) ROE = annual net profit ÷ shareholders’ equity

Basically, profit margin measures how much of revenue trickles down into earnings which illustrates how efficient the business is with its cost management. Asset turnover reveals how much revenue can be generated from Seagate Technology’s asset base. Finally, financial leverage will be our main focus today. It shows how much of assets are funded by equity and can show how sustainable the company’s capital structure is. We can determine if Seagate Technology’s ROE is inflated by borrowing high levels of debt. Generally, a balanced capital structure means its returns will be sustainable over the long run. We can examine this by looking at Seagate Technology’s debt-to-equity ratio. Currently the ratio stands at more than 2.5 times, which is very high. This means Seagate Technology’s above-average ROE is being driven by its significant debt levels and its ability to grow profit hinges on a significant debt burden.

Next Steps:

ROE is one of many ratios which meaningfully dissects financial statements, which illustrates the quality of a company. Seagate Technology exhibits a strong ROE against its peers, as well as sufficient returns to cover its cost of equity. With debt capital in excess of equity, ROE may be inflated by the use of debt funding, raising questions over the sustainability of the company’s returns. ROE is a helpful signal, but it is definitely not sufficient on its own to make an investment decision.

For Seagate Technology, I’ve compiled three pertinent factors you should look at:

1. Financial Health : Does it have a healthy balance sheet? Take a look at our free balance sheet analysis with six simple checks on key factors like leverage and risk.

2. Valuation : What is Seagate Technology worth today? Is the stock undervalued, even when its growth outlook is factored into its intrinsic value? The intrinsic value infographic in our free research report helps visualize whether Seagate Technology is currently mispriced by the market.

3. Other High-Growth Alternatives : Are there other high-growth stocks you could be holding instead of Seagate Technology? Explore our interactive list of stocks with large growth potential to get an idea of what else is out there you may be missing!
