

A plot to flood the streets of Sussex with 100,000 wraps of heroin was foiled in an operation branded the most successful of its kind to be conducted in the county.

Five men are facing long prison terms after drug squad officers seized a record 18kg of the class A drug.

Crime reporter BEN PARSONS reports on one of the biggest wholesale heroin rings detectives have ever brought before the courts.

In the back of a taxi in a London street last summer, a passenger sat with a bin bag on a seat next to him.

The car was pulled over and the man was confronted by Metropolitan Police officers, acting at the request of Sussex Police's serious organised crime unit.

Inside the bag was 10kg of heroin, worth half a million pounds, which was destined for Sussex.

The London seizure was the first in a week of arrests and searches which netted detectives their biggest haul of heroin to date.

A total of 18kg was found and was worth £1 million to the pushers and represented 100,000  <quote> “wraps” </quote>  taken off the streets.

Five men have now admitted their roles as key links in the higher reaches of the heroin supply chain.

This was big business – so big that one of the key organisers was back working at his makeshift heroin factory the day after he got married.

Atif Ali was the Mercedes-driving lynch pin at the Sussex end of the operation.

He took time out as the chain crumbled around him to get married at South Lodge Hotel in Horsham – the swanky five-star venue used by finance ministers in their advance meeting for the G20 summit last month.

His high-rolling image belied the squalid cottage industry he and his cronies were running.

Detectives watched him shopping in Crawley for gear including a food mixer, brown packaging tape, latex gloves and protective face masks.

When he was finally arrested, police found those wares covered in traces of heroin at the home of his crony Aaron Pritchard. A hydraulic press was being used to compress the mixed drug into bricklike blocks.

While prosecutors stopped short of describing Ali as a  <quote> “Mr Big” </quote> , he is said to have been co-ordinating the traffic of heroin carried out by the other four defendants.

He used intermediaries to spend as little time in contact with the drugs as possible when they were in transit but the trail led inexorably to his door.

On Monday, August 4, last year, Ali sent Jamie Cowsell to London to pick up 10kg of heroin.

Cowsell was arrested in the back of a taxi in Wandsworth Bridge Road, in Hammersmith, London.

The next day, Ali picked up Frank Isiodu in his Mercedes in Three Bridges, Crawley. They drove around the block, came back and Isiodu walked to a taxi where Kwasi Nkansah was sitting.

Isiodu passed Nkansah a package and the taxi drove off.

It headed towards London on the M23 but was stopped by police just north of Gatwick.

Nkansah was arrested with 1kg of heroin with a street value of £50,000.

The next day, Ali was seen buying spoons, scales and foodbags for his heroin processing plant.

But on Thursday, August 7, he took the day off to get married.

The following day, he was back on the job and was watched by detectives travelling to Pritchard's home in Maiden Lane, Langley Green, Crawley.

Police burst in and arrested the pair.

They found 6.76kg of heroin with a street value of £350,000.

Ali, 30, of The Birches, Three Bridges, Crawley, had admitted three counts of conspiracy to supply heroin.

Nkansah, 6, of Kennington, London; Cowsell, 37, of Hambleton Hill, Southgate, Crawley; and Pritchard, 34, of Maiden Lane, have all admitted conspiracy to supply heroin. Isiodu, 30, from Croydon, Surrey, admitted the same charge at a hearing at Hove Crown Court yesterday.

No date has been set for the sentencing of the five. Detectives said they expect to apply for the confiscation of their assets at a later hearing.
Operation comes after £1.7 million cash injection

Detectives hailed their record heroin haul as an unprecedented success for Sussex Police.

The force's serious organised crime unit took out a key section of a chain bringing heroin into Sussex for distribution here and across the country.

Detective Inspector Steve Paice said:  <quote> “This has been a highly successful intelligence-led policing operation.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “These people have been supplying heroin in bulk quantities and ultimately it would have impacted in many areas across the country.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “The investigation recovered over 18kg of heroin. The seizures represent unprecedented success for us.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “It is likely this heroin would have ultimately resulted in more than 100,000 individual supplies at street level.” </quote> 

Senior officers said it was impossible to estimate the effect the seizure would have on lower-level dealing and drug use.

Inevitably, whatever effect there is would be short-lived because of the army of willing criminals seeking to peddle class A drugs to the county's addicts.

But outreach workers said there was anecdotal evidence that short droughts often follow seizures or arrests, prompting some addicts to take advantage of help to beat their habits.

Justin Grantham works with addicts every day as harm reduction manager for the charity Crime Reduction Initiatives, in Gloucester Road, Brighton.

He and his staff play an important role in getting addicts who have turned to crime to feed their habits into treatment.

He said:  <quote> “We do tend to see some effect on the street but even if they knock out a whole supply network, it can be replaced within 48 hours.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “As soon as dealers' networks are aware that there are no drugs around they will be talking to their contacts to get supplies in.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “It has been noticed in the past that some people come into treatment services because there is a short drought, because they are missing their drug of choice and they are starting to withdraw from what they are using.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “It could be the thing that gives them the nudge to come in and see us.” </quote> 

The operation to snare Ali and his cronies came after the force invested £1.7 million to double the size of the serious organised crime unit.

Chief Superintendent Kevin Moore, the head of Sussex CID, said:  <quote> “Our success since this uplift can be measured in terms of the number of cases involving, in particular, large scale illegal drugs supply, armed robbery and people trafficking that have been brought to a successful conclusion.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “A large number of the most serious criminals have been sentenced to lengthy terms of imprisonment.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “Additionally, in the past year we have seized criminal assets in excess of £1.6 million.” </quote> 

