The Government is planning to  mitigate the damage caused by adding VAT to pasties by introducing a new ‘green' tax on chilled champagne.

A Green Paper leaked today proposes a ‘Thermal Reduction Initiative (Champagne)' that would add a nine per cent duty to all chilled champagne sold in public places.

If implemented, the average price of a bottle sold in a restaurant  would rise from £37.50 to £40.86.
Topped up: An unidentified delivery man waits to deliver boxes of champagne to 11 Downing Street

Topped up: An unidentified delivery man waits to deliver boxes of champagne to 11 Downing Street

Chancellor George Osborne  plans to present this as an environmental measure. Experts agree that champagne is best served at about 43 to 48F (6 to 7C).
RELATED ARTICLES

Previous
1
2
Next

The truth about David Cameron's pasty: It was actually a sausage roll from Greggs
The jerry can u-turn: Now government says DON'T queue for fuel as mother who set fire to herself while...
The gloating of Gorgeous George: How Galloway's cynical courting of young Muslims left Labour humiliated

Share this article
Share

This can be achieved by placing a room-temperature bottle in a fridge on a medium setting for three to four hours. However, this increases the carbon footprint of the typical wine bar by 0.05 per cent. Multiplied many times over the course of a typical evening, the Green Paper argues, this is  a significant amount.
Chancellor George Osborne plans to present the move as an environmental measure

Chancellor George Osborne plans to present the move as an environmental measure

According to the Government, some establishments in the City of London, and in Alderley Edge, the Cheshire village infamous as a playground for footballers' wives, use as much energy chilling champagne in a single evening as  a medium-size hospital expends on light and heating. Serving warm champagne, says No 10, is good for the environment.

The TRIC attack on champagne drinkers could be seen as a political manoeuvre to counter angry concerns that the ‘pasty tax' was  an upper-class assault on a working-class snack. But the sight of ten crates of champagne being delivered to No 11 Downing Street ahead of the ‘bubbly tax' is unlikely to convince voters that ‘we're all in this together'.

Meanwhile, wine merchants are demanding to know why champagne is targeted but not prosecco and cava, as bar owners and restaurateurs protest over what they see as an attack on their livelihoods.

And the Liberal Democrats say that they have always been against the levy – but claim they successfully lobbied their Coalition partners to exempt Pomagne and Babycham.

A host of Facebook pages have been set up to oppose the measure. ‘Tax Chavs, Not Champagne', purporting to have been created by the Bullyboy Club, the notorious Oxford drinking society for aristocrats, has attracted more than 800 ‘likes'.

Another, called ‘Chill, Dave!', claiming to represent staff at the investment bank Credit Reckitt, has 500 supporters.

A group of backbench Labour MPs hurriedly formed their own protest group which they gleefully named ‘The Champagne Socialists', all  memories of Alistair Darling's politically damaging cider tax of 2010 conveniently forgotten.
Pastygate: David Cameron became embroiled in a pasty tax fiasco when he was apparently caught telling fibs about his love of the hot snacks

Pastygate: David Cameron became embroiled in a pasty tax fiasco when he was apparently caught telling fibs about his love of the hot snacks

The Champagne Socialists' chosen spokesman was, perhaps inevitably, Frank Beers, MP for Theakston South. He said in a statement: ‘Champagne is what toffs quaff. If the Tories want to punish the people who vote for them with this brut-al tax, that's their look-out. On the other hand, why shouldn't the working man have a glass of bubbly? After all, he's earned it. Cheers.'

And the newly elected MP for Bradford Park, George Gallowgate, of the Respeck party, and a teetotaller, declared: ‘This Government  has popped its cork, lost its fizz and gone flat. It is a government of champagne Charlies in a parliament of pusillanimous poltroons. It is a tyranny of tipsy tycoons.'

But the Government has already started to backtrack. A Cabinet source said: ‘Look, this was something dreamed up by the PM and George over a couple of bottles of Dom Perignon '66 to try to show that they're just regular guys.

‘We never said it was going to  be policy. Nobody takes Green Papers seriously. They're just for larks, really.

‘There's no doubt that March has been a very bad month for us but we're going to draw a line under it and move on.

Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2123340/Bubbly-tax-After-furore-VAT-hot-pasties-Osborne-puts-green-levy-champagne-drinkers.html#ixzz4VHaCH92W
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
