The spin on Pelosi's talk with Assad / Delegation upbeat -- U.S. and Syrian reactions are mixed













Photo: HUSSEIN MALLA Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Syrian President Bashar Assad meets on Wednesday, April 4, 2007 with U.S. House speaker Nancy Pelosi at Ash-Shaeb presidential palace in Damascus. Pelosi arrived here Tuesday as the highest ranking US official to visit Syria since 2003 for talks with the Syrian leadership on the strained relations between Syria and the U.S., to convey a peace message from Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert to President Assad, and to discuss Iraq and other regional issues with Syria. Pelosi's visit was criticized by the US administration.(AP Photo Hussein Malla). less Syrian President Bashar Assad meets on Wednesday, April 4, 2007 with U.S. House speaker Nancy Pelosi at Ash-Shaeb presidential palace in Damascus. Pelosi arrived here Tuesday as the highest ranking US official ... more Photo: HUSSEIN MALLA Image 2 of 4 Syrian ambassador to the United States Imad Moustafa (L) greets U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (R) and Congress members as they arrive to meet Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in Damascus April 4, 2007. REUTERS/ Jamal Saidi (SYRIA) less Syrian ambassador to the United States Imad Moustafa (L) greets U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (R) and Congress members as they arrive to meet Syrian President Bashar al-Assad in Damascus April 4, 2007. ... more Photo: JAMAL SAIDI Image 3 of 4 Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem, right, stands with U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in Damascus on Wednesday, April 4, 2007 in Damascus. House Speaker Pelosi met Syrian government officials Wednesday for talks criticized by the White House as undermining American efforts to isolate the hard-line Arab country. Pelosi is expected to meet with Syrian President Bashar Assad later Wednesday. (AP Photo/Bassem Tellawi). less Syrian Foreign Minister Walid al-Moallem, right, stands with U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in Damascus on Wednesday, April 4, 2007 in Damascus. House Speaker Pelosi met Syrian government officials Wednesday ... more Photo: BASSEM TELLAWI Image 4 of 4 Syrian vice President Farouq al-Sharaa talks with U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in Damascus on Wednesday, April 4, 2007. House Speaker Pelosi met Syrian government officials Wednesday for talks criticized by the White House as undermining American efforts to isolate the hard-line Arab country. (AP Photo/Bassem Tellawi). less Syrian vice President Farouq al-Sharaa talks with U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi in Damascus on Wednesday, April 4, 2007. House Speaker Pelosi met Syrian government officials Wednesday for talks criticized by ... more Photo: BASSEM TELLAWI The spin on Pelosi's talk with Assad / Delegation upbeat -- U.S. and Syrian reactions are mixed 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

2007-04-05 04:00:00 PDT Damascus, Syria -- House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and her delegation said they had frank words with President Bashar Assad and other senior Syrian officials here on Wednesday, pressing the president over Syria's support for militant groups and insisting that his government block militants seeking to cross into Iraq and join insurgents there.

Members of the bipartisan delegation led by the San Francisco Democrat said they sought to persuade Assad to distance himself from Iran, Syria's ally in the growing confrontation with the so-called quartet of moderate Arab states, Saudi Arabia, Jordan, Egypt and the United Arab Emirates.

LATEST NEWS VIDEOS Now Playing: Now Playing San Francisco Deltas player and coach talk about the team's first year sfgate

Still exciting: Dozens line up outside Palo Alto Apple store for iPhone X KTVU2

2 Investigates: 911 Dispatch delays in some Bay Area cities KTVU2

Breweries give back, raise a glass to North Bay Fire victims KTVU2

Big GOP tax bill would cut rates -- but also popular breaks KTVU2

Mayor Schaaf delivers Oakland State of the City address at Islamic center KTVU2

Corey Feldman names alleged abuser during interview with Dr. Oz KTVU2

Twitter Says Employee Deactivated President Trump's Account On Last Day Of Work GeoBeats

Trump's Twitter Account Was Briefly Deactivated And People Had Mixed Feelings GeoBeats

NASA's Hubble Telescope Catches Asteroids Photobombing Galaxies GeoBeats

They said Rep. Tom Lantos, D-San Mateo, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, said he asked Assad how someone  <quote> "of his intelligence and knowledge of the world could have common cause with President (Mahmoud) Ahmadinejad of Iran, who has denied the Holocaust and calls for the elimination of Israel." </quote> 

Speaking to reporters on Wednesday, Pelosi said she had conveyed a message to Assad from Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert that he was ready to negotiate for peace. Shortly afterward, however, Olmert's office issued a clarification of his message, insisting that,  <quote> "although Israel is interested in peace with Syria, that country continues to be part of the axis of evil and a force that encourages terror in the entire Middle East." </quote> 

Members of the delegation said that among the issues they took up was the case of the three Israeli soldiers being held by the Lebanese militant group Hezbollah, which is supported by Iran, and the Palestinian group Hamas.

The lawmakers said they also sought to emphasize Syria's importance in bringing peace to Lebanon, Iraq and the Palestinian territories.

 <quote> "We came in friendship, hope, and determined that the road to Damascus is a road to peace," </quote>  Pelosi told reporters after her meetings. An aide said the speaker's delegation stressed to Assad that Bush and Congress are united in fighting terrorism and that if Syria wants to be part of that effort, it must rethink its association with Iran.

Her visit has been strongly criticized by the Bush administration and dismissed by some in the Middle East as a play for domestic politics.

At the White House on Tuesday, President Bush told reporters that he sees little point in talking to Syria.  <quote> "Sending delegations hasn't worked," </quote>  he said.  <quote> "It's just simply been counterproductive." </quote> 

And on Wednesday, Gordon Johndroe, a spokesman for the National Security Council, in a briefing on Air Force One said about Pelosi's  <quote> "road to peace" </quote>  remark:  <quote> "Unfortunately, that road is lined with the victims of Hamas and Hezbollah, and the victims of terrorists who cross from Syria into Iraq. It's lined with the victims in Lebanon, who are trying to fight for democracy there. It's lined with human rights activists trying for freedom and democracy in Syria." </quote> 

Pelosi's trip, initiated by an invitation from Assad and encouraged by the bipartisan Iraq Study Group, is part of an attempt to sway Bush administration policy on Iraq and the rest of the Middle East.

In November, the Iraq Study Group recommended that Washington open links with Iran and Syria to help stabilize the conflict in Iraq and cool other crises. Earlier this month, a group of Republican lawmakers also visited Damascus, calling on Bush to seek a dialogue with the Syrians.

Bush and his closest aides have resisted that idea, stressing their view that Syria is a state sponsor of terrorism. The administration accuses the Syrian government of providing militants with safe passage into Iraq and of interfering in Lebanon's politics after its army was forced to leave there in 2005. Syria denies the accusations.

Syrian officials have seized on the trip to show that their isolation is waning.

European officials and diplomats have ignored U.S. objections to meeting with Assad in recent months, citing many of the reasons Pelosi has.

 <quote> "Everyone knows there are different points of view between Syria and the United States," </quote>  said Syrian Foreign Minister Walid Moallem.  <quote> "We are happy that Mrs. Pelosi and her delegation had the courage and determination to bridge these differences." </quote> 

Syria's government-controlled newspapers hailed the recognition of Syria's role in the visit as a milestone.

 <quote> "Pelosi is in Damascus not because she loves this dear city, but because she is aware that it is impossible to ignore Syria's role," </quote>  one editorial in the daily Al Thawrah said.  <quote> "Now what remains to be done is for the others who are also aware of that to awaken from their sleep." </quote> 

Marwan al-Kabalan, a professor of political science and media at Damascus University, said Pelosi's arrival may take the pressure off diplomats and other Western officials seeking to engage Syria.

 <quote> "This will help give the impression that Syria is no longer isolated in the world," </quote>  Kabalan said.  <quote> "So now, you can't ask the Europeans or others not to visit the Syrians like you used to before." </quote> 

Yet many Syrians were left wondering what really changed after Pelosi's plane took off from Damascus Wednesday afternoon. Some analysts said they feared that instead of a grand opening with America, Syria had become a pawn in a domestic dispute between the Democrats and the Republicans.

Pelosi, who left for Saudi Arabia, took pains at the news conference to insist that she was not contradicting the Bush administration's policies in the Middle East.

 <quote> "There is no division on policy between us and President Bush -- be it on Israel, Palestine or Syria," </quote>  Pelosi told reporters at Damascus airport after concluding here meetings.  <quote> "As a mother, I will exhaust every remedy for peace." </quote> 

Some commentators used that comment as a springboard for criticism of Pelosi.

 <quote> "There was a feeling that this visit had more to do with domestic politics than us," </quote>  said one, Jihad Yaziji, editor in chief of the Syria Report, an online magazine, who attended a dinner in honor of Pelosi on Tuesday night.  <quote> "If she isn't going to be very different from Bush, then why did she come?" </quote> 