A criminal who turned police informer has turned his experiences in Sydney's red light strip into a book.

Tony no longer comes to the Cross after 9pm. He admits he is worried. It's not the alcohol, the fights or even the drugs - he has seen plenty of that. And anyway, Kings Cross is pretty clean now. In fact, he insists, it is entirely safe for civilians.

But Tony is no ordinary civilian. He has a history at the Cross, where he came at age 17? in the mid-1980s.

He does not explain why he is worried, but says he is lucky to have survived. When you hear him talk about the 1980s and '90s, it is clear he has seen and heard a lot. Perhaps too much.

At first he worked as a doorman at the Pink Pussycat, and later became associated with the Ibrahim brothers. He gave evidence at the police royal commission, where he was codenamed KX1 and accused of providing protection for Bill Bayeh.

Now he has turned his experiences into a book, released in time for the start of the latest in the Underbelly TV series. ''I've left heaps out,'' he says of the book, insisting it is for legal reasons.

But the man who put Tony's memories on paper, Jimmy Thomson, says that while Underbelly is entertainment Tony's book is ''the closest to the truth you are going to get''.

Advertisement

Thomson denies it glamorises crime and violence, an accusation recently levied by the Police Commissioner, Andrew Scipione, against television crime shows. It is just a bit of balance for all the police documentaries on TV, Thomson says.

In the '80s and early '90s there were good cops and bad cops, just as there were good and bad crims, it seems.

SHARE

Share on Facebook

Share on Twitter

Link  <quote> "We might not be totally innocent, but at least we weren't evil" </quote>  ... the man nicknamed  <quote> "the Inspector" </quote> , left, has seen and heard a lot in his time in Kings Cross. Photo: Brendan Esposito

''We might not be totally innocent, but at least we weren't evil,'' Tony says. ''We weren't violent. The boys were protecting their own turf.''

He says he was given the green light by some police, but insists he and his friends - including the Ibrahim brothers - never abused that and never did ''any big crime or anything''.

''Never in my life I was involved in anything serious,'' he says, his eyes wide open, his face perfectly still. ''I didn't have the heart. It wasn't in my character.''

He has spent a few days in a police cell and has had to perform community service, but has never spent time in jail.

It's the police that rolled over. They were the weak ones. They gave everyone up.

Tony admits to dealing in cannabis, and some sizeable rorts and rip-offs, mainly to feed his gambling habit.

But there is, it seems, an unspoken code: you don't rip off civilians and you don't dob on your mates.

He was no dog, just a police informer, he says. A snitch. So much so, apparently his friends nicknamed him ''the Inspector''.

''When word gets round that you are protected by both sides, you suddenly have a lot of people wanting to keep you happy and you don't have to do a thing,'' he says. People just wanted to give him money, he didn't ask for it and had to do nothing in return.

The royal commission, in effect, blackmailed people into talking. But it was police who broke the code.

''It's the police that rolled over. They were the weak ones. They gave everyone up.'' They were ''dobbing each other in like sucky kids at Sunday school''.

Tony insists he told the commission things only after someone had already rolled or been exposed by someone else. There was no need to name people who had family and had not done anything ''bad''. ''If you played the game their way - even if you weren't completely honest - you'd get away with it.''

Tony is still friends with the Ibrahims. Sam is ''the backbone'' of the business, he insists, the one who looked after everyone.

John Ibrahim took over in a power vacuum after the royal commission. He now keeps the Cross ''pretty clean and tight'', works hard, pays his taxes and has settled down, Tony says. ''You'd have to be stupid to risk all your work. He's not a stupid person.''

Tony says he helped police solve the murder of Constable Allan McQueen in 1989, but a source says his part was limited.

Tony says he gave police information about Phuong Ngo's role in the murder of John Newman and pointed them  <quote> "in the right direction" </quote>  about Gordon Wood.

Police who have worked on those cases refuse to comment.

A former police officer says Tony was a wheeler and dealer, who traded in gossip, and whose nickname was ''Shifty Tony''.

One of the commission's biggest catches, Trevor Haken, said controlled crime was better than uncontrolled crime, but the then police minister Paul Whelan told the ABC 10 years after the royal commission: ''They believed that they had noble cause. In fact, they were just straight crooks.''

Snitch, ''as told to Jimmy Thomson'', is published by Allen & Unwin.