For some time now we've been hearing some whisperings about a possible Pikmin game for the Revolution, but after some long-term pestering and investigating we can finally bring you what seems to be confirmation. During the GDC, we were put in touch with a representative for Nintendo (a translator) at the event who is also a close friend of Pikmin director Shigefumi Hino. The contact whom worked at NCL for nearly a decade had the following to say to Cubed3:  <quote> "A game directed by Shigefumi Hino and his team will be a launch title for the Revolution." </quote> 



Obviously we asked our contact to clarify if this would be Pikmin, he replied,  <quote> "The title is indeed running on the Pikmin engine but with some [major] changes. It is some way into development and will certainly be a sequel to a GameCube title" </quote> . So basically, Pikmin 3 will launch with the Revolution. We have also been told that it will be online and voice controlled in places.



Over the last few weeks we have chased up the lead and found out the following; Shigefumi Hino and the team that works with him (part of Nintendo's EAD unit) have not been confirmed to be working on a title since the launch of Pikmin 2, significant investment and resources have been allocated to the team (they have certainly been working on something), Miyamoto-san has already confirmed that he has the basic idea for Pikmin 3 in his mind and is ready to implement it.



Like it or not, Pikmin was a very inventive and exciting game on the GameCube and will surely make itself at home on the Revolution in whatever form it takes. We have also been told that the game WILL be shown at E3 in full working order and that it will be one of the key Revolution launch titles. As one of the senior directors in Nintendo's largest development houses, this will be a major new piece of work from Hino-san and a further collaboration with Miyamoto-san. Everything will probably be kept quiet until E3, but at least you can now sleep safe in the knowledge that the game exists.
