Brian Alvey spoiled the news, but now we can finally make the announcement:

In the wake of the recent landmark ruling returning 50-percent copyright ownership of Superman to the estate of Jerry Siegel, the Siegel estate has announced their first deal to publish Superman — and we’re proud to say, it’s with us. Starting in time for the San Diego Comic-Con, we will be publishing new Superman stories.

Mike Grell, fresh off of drawing Supes for Action Comics #861 (pictured here) will be drawing the new series, making this the first time in 25 years that he will be drawing a series that he hasn’t written himself. He will be starting as soon as he’s done with his current commitment to Jon Sable Freelance. Dick Giordano is coming out of retirement to ink the series, alongside veteran inker Frank McLaughlin.

John Ostrander will be writing the initial debut of Superman, detailing how he fell through an interdimensional portal and ended up in Cynosure and Munden’s Bar, where the usual confusion reigns until GrimJack intervenes to set things right. From there, he will be crossing over into various other universes (and series) all in an attempt to find his way back to his prime universe.

Mike Gold, ComicMix editor-in-chief, notes:  <quote> "This will allow Clark to appear in all of our series– Demons of Sherwood, EZ Street, The Adventures of Simone and Ajax, our recently relaunched Black Ice— we can even work him into Trevor Von Eeden’s upcoming biography of Jack Johnson." </quote> 

Other talent connected to the ongoing stories will be announced in time for the New York Comic Con, although you’ll hear about if first here on ComicMix. And of course, these will be free comics, just like all the rest of our series.

How does DC feel about this? Well, they really can’t do anything as long as the Siegel estate pays 50-percent of the revenue earned to DC. Of course, we expect that the Siegel estate may take a few decades splitting the revenues and making sure DC gets its fair share. Turnabout is fair play, after all.
