Minister for Trade and Industry (Industry) S Iswaran encouraged SMEs to partner government agencies such as A*STAR and SPRING in order to enhance productivity.

SINGAPORE: Small and medium enterprises have been spending more on research and development, and the Government hopes more businesses can tap on innovation and technology for future growth.



This is according to Trade and Industry (Industry) Minister S Iswaran, who said SMEs spent about S$800 million on R&D in 2014 - 38 per cent more than in 2013.



Mr Iswaran, speaking at research agency A*STAR's SME day, where he was guest of honour, encouraged SMEs to partner government agencies such as A*STAR and SPRING Singapore to leverage on innovation and technology to boost productivity and develop new capabilities.

A*STAR has already rolled out a number of programmes to help SMEs, and the number of joint projects by A*STAR and SMEs has increased five-fold from about 600 between 2006 and 2010, to 3,000 between 2011 and 2015.



One such initiative he highlighted was the Growing Enterprises through Technology Upgrade (GET-up) Programme, where A*STAR provides technical advice and technology road-mapping services for SMEs. The programme has assisted 530 SMEs with technology consultancy services since its inception in 2003.

Under the T-Up programme, researchers from A*STAR are seconded to SMEs to help businesses sharpen their innovation capabilities, said Mr Iswaran. The researchers also help to develop solutions for the businesses they work with, which are customised and tailored to the needs of each firm.

In addition, A*STAR has a slew of technology solutions that businesses can adopt to improve productivity, as part of the research agency's Technology Adoption Programme, which was launched in 2013.

For instance, fashion retailer Decks has adopted a RFID-based system to manage its inventory, reducing the need to count each piece of clothing manually.



 <quote> "It is vital that we press on with efforts to help SMEs achieve innovation-led growth, so that they remain responsive and resilient to economic pressures and are well-positioned to seize future opportunity. R&D, innovation and technology are critical tools to help our SMEs improve their business processes, cut costs and grow their top-level," </quote>  said Mr Iswaran.
