In an exclusive interview with Canadian Moustache Aficionado, Rush drummer Neil Peart took time out of his busy rehearsal schedule to discuss the upcoming R40 Live tour — but, more importantly, his new handlebar moustache. Like the rare comet that returns once or twice in a lifetime, it's been approximately 37 years since these iconic whiskers have adorned Peart's face.

Above: Neil Peart and his new handlebar moustache. Photo courtesy of Grump.

David O. Alexander (DOA): Hi, Neil! Thank you for taking time to talk to Canadian Moustache Aficionado.

Neil Peart: Nice to meet you, David. It's a first for me, too, talking to a moustache magazine.

DOA: Before we start, I have to tell you that your handlebar moustache was very inspirational to me. I could never grow one like yours, but that didn't stop me from trying!

Neil Peart: As Bob Dylan said,  <quote> "The highest purpose of art is to inspire." </quote>  I'm glad my moustache inspired you, although I don't know if it qualifies as  <quote> "art." </quote>  (Laughs)

DOA: So my first question is, after all these years why bring the moustache back now?

Classic Rush: Geddy Lee, Alex Lifeson, and a moustachioed Neil Peart

Neil Peart: There's actually an interesting chain of events that led to this choice. First off, throughout the years I've heard from many fans around the world clamoring for a return of that 70s handlebar moustache. I can't say I understand this form of monomania. I mean, I understand it in terms of pursuing a goal or acquiring a skill, but not a moustache. So, around the Test for Echo (1996-1997) tour, I got the idea to grow a goatee. I'd already affected a handlebar, as you know, and didn't want to repeat that pattern. It was also a bit of an experiment. I really wanted to see if the letters would stop about the handlebar. They didn't. If anything, there were more letters.


Test for Echo: Neil Peart and the goatee

DOA: Actually, I was one of those fans who wrote to you. Do you remember reading my letter?

Neil Peart: Um, no. I try to read all my mail, but I just don't have time to respond to everything.

DOA: How many letters do you get asking specifically about the handlebar moustache?

Neil Peart: Last month it was probably 50. But the important thing is, even with all those letters, I just couldn't accept bringing back that particular hirsute artifact from the past.

DOA: Be honest. Was it my letter that helped change your mind?

Neil Peart: In many ways, David, I wish it had been your letter. It would have been a lot easier. No, this pressure came from an altogether different vector. During the Clockwork Angels tour, we made an intermission and outro film in which I played a gnome with an exaggerated Burnside-style beard/moustache. At the end of 2014, my Mom finally watched the DVD for that concert. The next day, she called and asked,  <quote> "Whatever happened to that wonderful moustache you used to wear?" </quote>  I tried to explain, but she wouldn't listen.

Neil Peart as a gnome

DOA: Did you tell her about all the letters?

Neil Peart: No, I didn't tell her about any of that nonsense. But after I didn't respond positively to the relentless moustache overtures, she started another campaign. First, she called my wife. Then Geddy, Alex — even the front office! I started getting calls from all of these people, asking what was going on. I was worried she might take to Facebook or even call into Eddie Trunk's show.

DOA: That would be so cool if she called into Eddie Trunk!

Neil Peart: Maybe for you. Anyway, my Dad finally called — as a kind of intermediary, I guess. He said,  <quote> "Neil, you need to listen to your mother. She knows what's best. You wouldn't be in Rush without her sage advice." </quote>  Here I was in the middle of preparing for a major North American tour — including putting together my new DW drum set made out of 1,500 year old Romanian river oak — and I was getting badgered every day about a silly moustache! So, I called my Mom and gave her the good news. The moustache was to have an encore performance after all. (Laughs)

DOA: That's quite a story! But I do think your Mom does know best.

Neil Peart: You may be right. Incidentally, all this drama made me think again about a quote I like, which is attributed to either Plato, Philo of Alexandria, or John Watson (depending on your source):  <quote> "Be kind — for everyone you meet is fighting a hard battle." </quote>  I realized I was fighting a losing battle against a moustache.

DOA: That's a great quote.  <quote> "I realized I was fighting a losing battle against a moustache." </quote> 

Neil Peart: Yeah, actually that is pretty good. I need to write that down.

DOA: You know, I'm curious. Don't you think you could sell them?

Neil Peart: Sell what?

DOA: Sell official Neil Peart handlebar moustaches — you know, like the kind you glue on your face for Halloween? I bet you'd make a crapload of money!

Neil Peart: Forgive my silence, but I'm trying to figure out if you're serious...

DOA: I couldn't be more serious.

Neil Peart: I've heard a lot of product pitches, but that one... let's just say it reaches a new level of originality.

DOA: So you think it's a good idea?

Neil Peart: I suppose there are worse ideas. But not many.


Postscript

I wasn't sure how the interview went. But a few days later, I got an email from SRO (Rush's management company) from Ray Daniels himself:

Mr. Alexander,

Neil Peart wanted me to contact you about your interview with him. Here is what he wrote:

 <quote> "What can I say? The interview with Canadian Moustache Aficionado was groundbreaking on so many levels. If only we'd had more time..." </quote> 
Neil also wanted me to pass along the following info, as he thought that you — of all people — would appreciate it. We're announcing a specialty item on Rushbackstage.com for fans who want to own a piece of the Peart moustache mystique. Attached is a screengrab of this item:
