MercuryGate, the leading transportation management solution provider, and Banyan Technology, the leader and pioneer of live carrier connectivity, announced today a partnership leveraging their respective existing technologies focused on driving maximum efficiencies through TMS and freight buying decisions. 

The collaboration between the two industry leaders aims to streamline rapid deployment of increased LTL functionality in MercuryGate's TMS platform. The integration between MercuryGate's TMS platform and Banyan's live carrier connectivity leverages Banyan's existing connections to a large and diverse group of carriers and 3PLs.

 <quote> "Banyan brings a deep knowledge base and experience in leveraging live connectivity, which results in real savings for MercuryGate users," </quote>  said Monica Wooden, CEO and Co-Founder of MercuryGate International, Inc.  <quote> "For companies in time-pressured industries, moving from a batch-based technology like EDI to real-time connectivity exponentially increases MercuryGate's users' ability to move product and better serve their clients." </quote> 

Live connectivity with carriers, including API connectivity, is growing as more companies realize the benefits of connecting directly with carriers, including reduced freight expenses, automated steps in the freight management process, and increased business and operations visibility.

 <quote> "MercuryGate has a depth of offerings that were forged in the complexities of the third-party market as a leader across multiple modes," </quote>  said Lance Healy, Banyan's co-founder and chief innovation officer.  <quote> "As technology in the market evolved, both organizations developed a mutual respect for each other's offerings and recognized the value delivered to the clients with a very powerful combined solution." </quote> 

As a result of the integration, MercuryGate users will experience a variety of benefits, including: direct tendering and proactive tracking of LTL shipments to eliminate the need for pick-up and check calls; agility in pricing and carrier negotiations; and unprecedented visibility and control of the total freight management cycle.

The industry's increasing use of direct links with carriers is fueled by the growing understanding and familiarity with API connectivity, which is trending toward replacing EDI as the industry standard for freight management.

 <quote> "In today's competitive business landscape, it is technology that's going to set the top organizations and service providers apart," </quote>  said Banyan CEO Brian Smith.  <quote> "Never has there been greater opportunity to maximize technology in freight management, and Banyan is thrilled to provide live carrier connectivity to the MercuryGate user base." </quote> 

About MercuryGate International

MercuryGate provides powerful transportation management solutions proven to be a competitive advantage for today's most successful shippers, 3PLs, freight forwarders, and brokers. MercuryGate's solutions are unique in their native support of all modes of transportation on a single platform including Parcel, LTL, Truckload, Air, Ocean, Rail and Intermodal. Through the continued release of innovative, results-driven technology and a commitment to making customers successful, MercuryGate delivers exceptional value for TMS users through improved productivity and operational efficiency. MercuryGate offers business intelligence to improve transportation processes, increase customer satisfaction, and reduce costs. Find out why MercuryGate has set the industry standard for the most adaptable, comprehensive, transportation solutions suite in the industry at www.mercurygate.com.

About Banyan Technology

Banyan Technology is North America's leading provider of live carrier and API connectivity for transportation management. With more than 1,300 carrier connections and 28,000 client locations accessing the application, Banyan Technology provides commercial shippers, brokers, and 3PLs with unparalleled access to carrier data. These connections boost efficiency, improve visibility, and deliver permanent reductions in shipping costs .For more information on Banyan Technology, visit our website.

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/world-class-logistics-solutions-providers-mercurygate-and-banyan-technology-announce-integration-partnership-300434440.html

SOURCE Banyan Technology, Inc.
