Anders Fogh Rasmussen has transformed Danish politics and raised the country’s profile in his eight years as premier. Whether he can do the same for Nato will be his next big challenge.

As secretary-general of Nato, Mr Rasmussen occupies the most senior international post ever held by a Dane. Mr Rasmussen has long been the frontrunner for the role – despite coming from one of the smaller alliance members – demonstrating the respect he has earned both as a skilful European Union dealmaker and a stalwart Atlanticist.

A hard working, serious-minded man known as a perfectionist, Mr Rasmussen, 56, set his sights on becoming prime minister while at school and has long been preparing the ground for stepping up to the international stage.

As premier, by freezing taxes and responding to voters’ fears about immigration, Mr Rasmussen built his Venstre (liberal) party into Denmark’s leading political party. He then went on to win re-election twice – the first time his party has managed that feat.

Mr Rasmussen resigned on Saturday and his successor, finance minister Lars Lokke Rasmussen – the third consecutive premier with that surname – now has a tough act to follow, particularly with the economy and the minority government’s popularity hitting new lows.

Inside the EU Mr Rasmussen won plaudits for achieving agreement on the accession of the first wave of former Warsaw Pact members when Denmark held the EU’s rotating presidency. Today, because of the personal friendships he has forged as one of the EU’s longest serving premiers, he still plays the role of a consensus-builder.

 <quote> “He is a very, very pragmatic, down-to-earth politician,” </quote>  says Lykke Friis, dean of Copenhagen University and a specialist on EU affairs.  <quote> “He always has a gameplan and he’s very interested in producing results.” </quote> 

At the same time Mr Rasmussen has also demonstrated strong convictions, notably when he committed Danish troops to the 2003 US invasion of Iraq despite a lack of popular or opposition backing. This was a clear break both with Denmark’s traditional consensus-based foreign policy and previous governments’ reluctance to commit combat troops.

As secretary-general, Mr Rasmussen has already said that his focus will be the EU-Nato relationship. Nato and the EU have frequently clashed in the past over which organisation would do what, most recently on the issue of fighting piracy off the coast of Somalia. A convinced pro-European, Mr Rasmussen will be in a strong position to negotiate with the EU over the division of responsibilities between Nato and the EU.

Because he is the prime minister of a modest-sized EU nation, many diplomats believe Mr Rasmussen will also have more ability than some of his predecessors to cajole member states over the need to step up to the plate on Afghanistan. Denmark has 750 troops there and has suffered one of the worst losses per capita.
