The move is expected to be made public within the next week, The Roar can reveal, after obtaining copies of correspondence between FIFA president Sepp Blatter, and a powerful Australian lobby group including Football Federation Australia chief Frank Lowy, former Opposition leader Malcolm Turnbull, and Channel Nine figurehead Eddie McGuire.

The unprecedented step of stripping a nation of its hosting rights is ostensibly due to revelations of corruption and misinformation in the Qatari bid.

But it comes at the same time as Qatari football head Mohammad bin Hammam has launched a move to topple Blatter from football’s top job.

Of the labyrinthine wrangling that went on as the bids were assessed, one of the most important deals was bin Hammam reportedly securing Blatter’s support in return for an agreement not to run for the presidency.

With the World Cup seemingly in the bag, bin Hammam reneged on the deal.

The turnaround left Blatter drained. But he’s now decided not to take it lying down.

The first rumblings began in February, when bin Hammam suggested an Asian candidate should take on the presidency. Nine days later, Blatter’s personal assistant wrote to Lowy.

In the light of  <quote> “serious issues that are currently under investigation,” </quote>  the message said, a back-up venue for the 2022 tournament needed to be chosen.

As the second-placed bid behind Qatar, the United States was the logical option, but talks with the USSF  <quote> “were not able to progress beyond a preliminary level.” </quote> 

It is understood that political considerations were key: given the current tension between the US and the Arab world, the country could ill afford to be seen to be taking a World Cup from a Middle Eastern nation.

In the meantime, bin Hammam stated that Blatter’s presidential nomination by the footballing powerhouse of Somalia made him a  <quote> “pirate” </quote> .

Then on March 18, the Qatari officially announced his intention to challenge, and communication between Blatter and Lowy’s hastily-assembled war group skyrocketed.

On March 21, Lowy was informed that  <quote> “investigations had been completed” </quote> , and that hosting of the Cup would be turned over to Australia if they could make financial and logistical guarantees.

Lowy had not been idle in the meantime, and could call on the likes of Turnbull, McGuire, and businessman Sir Rod Eddington to do just that.
