I'm very pleased to report that HP has granted me the exclusive rights to announce the upcoming release of their newest offering to the MediaSmart Server series of Windows Home Server systems. Customizable and Special Edition versions of hardware is nothing new for HP, with one of the more notable examples being the Vivenne Tam line of notebook computers. With the new MediaSmart Server Bling line of Windows Home Servers, HP is making the move to differentiate their servers from the competition not only with more features in the software but also with more sparkles in the hardware.

The first MediaSmart Server was what has become the industry standard, a 4-drive black box designed to do it's job efficiently but unobtrusively. HP next decided to shrink things and released the LX195, which was a small single-drive server that satisfied the all-important Wife Appeal Factor by eliciting the  <quote> “awww it's so cute!” </quote>  reaction, yet left the husbands feeling inadequate due to insufficient expandability. HP followed that up exactly one year ago today by going the other direction and releasing the massive MediaSmart Server GX3297, a 32-drive server which unfortunately was quickly discontinued after safety concerns arose due to several incidents of toppled servers and flattened family pets. With the new MediaSmart Server Bling, HP has returned to the proven formula of the 4-drive Home Server, yet made it appealing to a broader audience.

For those discerning customers who require access to a timepiece while storing their critical files, HP has you covered with the  <quote> “Iced Out Spinner Clock Home Server” </quote> .

I asked my HP marketing contact to share the thinking behind the new MediaSmart Server Bling, and here's what he had to say.

Our extensive market research has made it clear that there are many customers who want their Home Server to be as unique and ostentatious as they are. Even though HP historically has made nerdy scientific equipment like oscilloscopes and calculators, we wanted to show that the Home Server doesn't have to be the classy yet boring appliance that our competitors are currently offering. In addition to the already shown Bling enhanced servers, we are also currently in the process of finalizing a line of servers that include Spinning rims for the highest level of style and portability.

Owners of the previous generations of MediaSmart Server will be pleased to learn that HP has committed to making a Bling upgrade available to you in the coming months. The upgrade will require a special order from the HP website, and will cost twice as much for Canadians as any other region. I've been fortunate enough to have already upgraded my EX487 with the new Bling treatment, and while it's not as fancy as the new official  <quote> “Bling” </quote>  line of servers, the sparkles do add a nice effect to the glowing drive LEDs.
