Big news Room fans!

Many of you are familiar with The Room Tribute, a game @JohnnyUtah, @Oney and I made based on our favorite movie, The Room.

People keep asking us when there will be a Switch version of The Room but GUESS WHAT we were already on that last summer. We partnered with Epikgames Games, a super talented port house out of Serbia, to make it happen. It's been moving fast and we're expecting a release this June!

All of the art has been redone in HD and the music is now the actual music from The Room. The guys at Epikgames Games even got creative and added a Denny side quest that's twice as big as the original game! It's like an entire exploration of the drug underworld in San Francisco and it touches on modern-day issues with the opioid epidemic, which makes it feel kinda prescient considering The Room took place in 2003.

Things are going so well that we're talking to them about on-line play too… Thinking there could be a way that one person could be Tommy and the other could be Mark, and instead of co-op, it would be like two stories being played in a persistent world where you occasionally cross paths. We even asked them if they could let other people be Denny, Chris R and Lisa. They said they would try it so we're waiting to see what they come up with, these guys are really pulling out all the stops! It even makes me wonder about adding procedurally generated levels, like what if Lisa redecorated the house every time you left? We could even play off the pictures of spoons and make them randomize to be forks and knives and other housewares. There's just so much potential here and the EGG guys are really eager to try stuff.

Here's a picture of the box art! I think we're making something really unique for the Switch and it's gonna introduce even more people to The Room and Newgrounds and that's always good. Are you gonna buy it?

In other news, the Pit People Art Contest winners were announced and we launched a new video encoding server with better video / audio output than the other big sites!