Through a special arrangement with author JK Rowling and her representatives, HPANA is proud to present an exclusive interview with the title character in Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince.

Our own forum moderator Renee got to sit down with the soon-to-be-famous star:
Interview with the Half-Blood Prince

Renee: Hello, thank you for being with me today. It's such a pleasure to finally get to meet you. We've all heard so much about you.

HBP: Why, thank you very much. It's an honor.

Renee: So what's it like to have this secret identity and not be able to give yourself away?

HBP: It was very hard to deal with at first. There are so many people I want to tell, but I can't. Now I'm better at dealing with it. I keep telling myself that everyone will know soon, and that helps.

Renee: Why is your identity a secret?

HBP: Well, it's supposed to be a surprise. What good would knowing who I am be to you all as readers?

Renee: True, I never thought of it that way. So, are you getting anxious that soon, everyone will know who you are?

HBP: Oh yes, most definitely. There are times when I just want to go up to random Harry Potter lovers and say,  <quote> "I am the Half-Blood Prince!" </quote>  I can't keep it in much longer. I'm too excited.

Renee: How did you feel when you found out that you were the Half-Blood Prince?

HBP: Hmm... good question. I was shocked, quite frankly. I remember where I was when I found out. I was... hang on, if I told everyone now it would probably give away something important. Let's just say I was pleasantly surprised.

Renee: What's it like to see the mystery of your identity unfolding right before your eyes? I mean there are posters that will be up soon counting down the days until your identity is revealed.

HBP: Well, I just laugh when I read the posters. In a way I like knowing something that everyone else doesn't know. My identity is like that of a super hero. I want everyone to know who I am.

Renee: So tell me a little bit about yourself.

HBP: Well I... hey, you almost tricked me!

Renee: Finally, is there anything that you want Potter fans to know?

HBP: Just support me when I make my debut Saturday, July 16th. And please stop Googling me until then. It's creepy.

Renee: Thank you. All the rest of you Harry Potter fans can find out who the Half-Blood Prince is in JK Rowling's 6th book, which hits bookstands July 16, 2005.
