EXCLUSIVE: Bravo TV has the ultimate Housewives experience in the works. Real Housewives All-Stars Edition is coming and it's taking the network's flagship franchise to a whole new level. In a statement released the morning of April 1, Bravo announced this latest addition to the Housewives lineup and included a few thoughts from Andy Cohen, who will be executive producing the new show:

 <quote> “I couldn't be more excited to be finally sharing this exciting news with all of you, the loyal Housewives fans who made it all possible! After years of negotiations and planning, Real Housewives All-Stars Edition will be the culmination of every Housewives city and season leading up to this moment. I launched my production company, Most Talkative, with the primary intent of bringing this revolutionary Housewives experience to Bravo and, here's what– it's going to be epic.” </quote> 

So, what exactly is Real Housewives All-Stars Edition? Will it be like watching an episode of Game of Thrones? Well, the network describes it as the natural progression of the Housewives franchise for the modern world. With today's communication technology and jet-set lifestyles, the wealthiest Americans are no longer restricted to their immediate geographical location when it comes to building social networks. So, it makes sense for The Real Housewives to go beyond the confines of their individual cities and communities and interact on a national scale. Bravo has selected an elite group of the most popular Housewives, one from each installment, who will come together to create a completely new dynamic as the women travel the country, and the globe, as a group.

housewievs-all-stars

And, boy, the network isn't exaggerating when they call this group of women All-Stars! The cast of the upcoming special new series will be:

Lisa Vanderpump, The Real Housewives of Beverly Hills

Vicki Gunvalson, The Real Housewives of Orange County

Ramona Singer, The Real Housewives of New York City

Teresa Giudice(*), The Real Housewives of New Jersey

Joanna Krupa, The Real Housewives of Miami

NeNe Leakes, The Real Housewives of Atlanta
