As the bestselling vehicle in Mitsubishi’s meager North American lineup, the Outlander Sport carries some significant weight on its shoulders. Not only the company’s player in the hotly contested compact SUV segment, the Outlander Sport also soon will be representing the American workforce: Beginning in July 2013, Mitsubishi’s Normal, Illinois, manufacturing facility will supply both the U.S and export markets such as South/Central America, Russia, and the Middle East with 2013 model-year Outlander Sports.

Not to be confused with its big brother Outlander, the Outlander Sport appeared in the 2011 model year as a smaller, only slightly more economical version of the Outlander. At the time, the Outlander Sport with a 2.0-liter four earned EPA mileage ratings of 25 mpg city/31 highway—those won’t change for 2013—while a 2.4-liter-equipped Outlander comes in at 23/28. While such meager efficiency benefits certainly don’t help it against its showroom sibling, the 2013 Outlander Sport will be refreshed to help it better battle the likes of the Honda CR-V, Ford Escape, Kia Sportage, and Toyota RAV4.

The 2.0-liter, DOHC four-cylinder engine mates to an available continuously variable transmission that has been recalibrated for improved acceleration and smoother operation. (A five-speed manual is the base-model transmission.) Mitsubishi’s shift-on-the-fly all-wheel-drive system is now controlled with via a button in place of the former dial. Further chassis changes are limited to tweaking the rear suspension setup for better ride quality.
title=

Below a freshly restyled trapezoid grille, the lower front fascia holds recessed fog lamps with new chrome surrounds. Blacked-out lower valances front and rear, black lower side sills, and rear LED taillamps are also new.

Two additional exterior colors—White Pearl and Quick Silver—join the existing palette of Laguna Blue, Labrador Black Pearl, Mercury Gray, and Rally Red. All trim levels now get 18-inch aluminum wheels as standard.

Interior Tact

Mitsubishi applied the same light touch to the Sport’s interior as it did to its exterior. New fabric choices and chrome accents complement a leather-wrapped steering wheel and shift knob. Standard tech includes steering-wheel-mounted audio controls and Mitsubishi’s FUSE Hands-free Link System for voice-activated operation of iPods and phones. Pony up for the SE version and you get heated front seats, rain-sensing wipers, xenon headlights, and an upgraded six-speaker audio system with satellite radio.

It’s true that Mitsubishi has never really been more than a bit player here in the States, but the brand does have its devotees. Mitsubishi is hoping the mild updates to the Outlander Sport will not only appease the few faithful, but maybe bring some new converts into the tent, too. 
