International junk removal firm, 1-800-GOT-JUNK?, is rolling out a new, unique operations strategy to aggressively grow revenue during the recession.

 <quote> "Tough times call for tough measures," </quote>  says Brian Scudamore, Founder and CEO of 1-800-GOT-JUNK?.  <quote> "Service-based businesses are really feeling the economic pinch, but we know people still need to get rid of their junk and we feel we've found a great way to help them do that. We've built this brand by doing things unconventionally, and we're excited about our ground-breaking new growth strategy." </quote> 

100,000 rats will join the franchised operation to source out new junk removal opportunities for the company. Phase one begins April 1st. 1-800-GOT-JUNK? Founder and CEO Brian Scudamore says the operation is simple: 1) We take rats and release them in targeted residential areas. 2) They find junk. 3) Residents find the rats, recognize our logo and will call 1-800-GOT-JUNK to have the rats and their junk removed. The following, our TV ad, demonstrates the operation:

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AbMF4R76aV8

1-800-GOT-JUNK? is located in the top 100 metropolitan centers in North America. In order to successfully launch the North America-wide campaign with enough rats, 1-800-GOT-JUNK? has set up a breeding center in Vancouver, BC. The company assures that no rats will be harmed during the program.

With families spending more time at home, Scudamore believes there is no better time to encourage them to get their space back and have their junk removed.  <quote> "People have stuff piling up in their garages, basements, spare bedrooms, and offices. Rats are attracted to junk and since no one likes rats, we believe that we're really helping consumers get rid of their junk and we get our rats back. It's a win-win." </quote> 

About 1-800-GOT-JUNK?
1-800-GOT-JUNK? is pioneering an industry that is helping residents and businesses remove junk and regain space. Whether it's a pile of household junk in the garage or a warehouse full of office furnishings, 1-800-GOT-JUNK? removes it for you, making the ordinary business of junk removal exceptional.
