St. Petersburg, Fla. - The Luczo Dragon Racing team is using HP technology at every stage of a race.

HP workstations, mobile PCs and HP OfficeJet printers are used to design the cars and manage everything from the telemetry to the engine of the team's car during the race. Raphael Matos, 2009 Apex Brazil IndyCar Rookie of the Year, will be behind the wheel of the HP-powered Luczo Dragon race car. Davey Hamilton, one of the most experienced drivers in the IZOD IndyCar Series, will pilot a second HP Luczo Dragon car for three races.

Using HP technology, the Luczo Dragon Racing team is able to maximize performance on and off the track. HP technology is used in every aspect of performance, engineering, reliability, management, mobility, robustness, raw computing power and design.Off the track, engineers use HP workstations to enhance parts design, data collection, storage, analysis, simulation and optimization. To prepare for each race, engineers on the Luczo Dragon Racing team run simulations to understand how the car's setup will affect performance for a given track. The team needs to understand the behavior of the car and the effect of changes in performance.Effectively, the team tries to develop and optimize the car through simulations and optimization routines. These simulations and test runs generate massive amounts of data. The multicore processing power of HP servers and workstations allows the team to run multiple simulations and optimizations at once – increasing the team's efficiency.After miles of practice runs, the team identifies areas on the car that need to be fine-tuned for maximum reliability and functionality – using HP workstations the team is able to redesign each aspect of the car for optimal performance.On the track, the team uses HP notebooks to monitor every move the car makes and remotely adjust suspension, telemetry and engine systems for optimal performance during every second of the race. While the car speeds around the track at 220 miles per hour, it is critical for the team to be able to analyze the information they're receiving from sensors on the car and immediately understand where performance deficits may lie.