The recut trailer has become an art form in its own right, with the trend to mix-up existing trailer or film footage to give the montage new meaning taking off back in 2005 when a competition from the Association of Independent Creative Editors led to The Shining being recut as a family comedy.

We've picked ten of the best that add a horror angle to the most light-hearted of films, and show just what's possible with clever editing, emotive music and of course, voice-over man's authoritative input. See our selection below and let us know any of your favorites in the comments.

1. Mary Poppins







One of the original recut trailers shows just how powerful the technique is by taking the upbeat, song-filled Mary Poppins and turning it into  <quote> "Scary Mary," </quote>  a bone-chilling horror. A spoonful of sugar, this ain't.

2. Uncle Buck







If you thought the scariest thing about Uncle Buck was John Candy's back-firing Mercury Marquis coupe, then this recut will make you see the John Hughes flick with new eyes — new, scared eyes.

3. Amelie







We always knew there was something sinister about Amelie, and this trailer edits the original film beautifully to show a darker side of the French waitress. Though we're let down slightly by a poor voice-over, it's nonetheless worth a watch.

4. Sleepless in Seattle







Nora Ephron takes an uncharacteristic stroll on the dark side when a call into a radio advice show looks to have triggered an obsession that will almost certainly end in tragedy for Seattle resident Sam Baldwin and his young son Jonah.

5. Office Space







All hell breaks lose at Initech in this clever recut that turns the geek fave into a chilling thriller. You'll never look at a red Swingline stapler in quite the same way again.

6. Ferris Bueller's Day Off







Gone are the fun teenage antics as Edward Rooney becomes a crazed killer in this version of Ferris Bueller, set on Friday 13th.

7. Toy Story







It's not just Sid's freakish playthings that will give you willies in this take on Toy Story. Sentient toys pose a threat to children, and in fact all mankind, in this animated horror fest from Pixar. Play nice...

8. Home Alone







Old Man Marley takes center stage as the shovel murderer in another re-imagined John Hughes movie.

9. Groundhog Day







There's no cute marmot in this version of Groundhog Day, in which Bill Murray's deja vu takes a decidedly darker turn.

10. The Shining







We're ending the list with the classic The Shining recut that takes the opposite approach to the videos above, turning a terrifying thriller into a family-friendly romantic comedy. That Jack Torrance sure looks like a swell guy...

For more social media coverage, follow Mashable Social Media on Twitter or become a fan on Facebook

More web video resources from Mashable: