Button proves he is a man for all seasons after stunning win in Malaysian downpour



Forks of lightning lit up the dusk sky, flash bulbs sparkled like beacons in the stand, thunder rumbled, fans on the grass bank sought refuge under the palms and, finally, after drizzle, an ocean fell out of the sky.



Through it all emerged Jenson Button, showing himself to be a man for all seasons. Two races into the campaign, two wins. One in bone-dry Australia, the other in soaking-wet Malaysia yesterday. He is currently unstoppable.



The circumstances bordered on the ridiculous, but what drama we saw. The race may have been abandoned after 32 laps — with the classification taken from the placings at the end of the previous lap — but it was edge-of-the seat stuff as the bad weather rolled in.



In the wet: One of the cars passes pit lane during the rain storm in Malaysia

As early as the seventh lap, word went out: heavy rain expected. At this point Button, who had started from pole, was third after a slow lift-off from the grid. Nico Rosberg’s Williams and Jarno Trulli’s Toyota were the cars in front.



But with the clouds hovering menacingly, Button put in an electrifying spurt after the other two had pitted and emerged from his first refuelling leading by five seconds. There was no question that his Brawn GP chariot was unassailable, other than for the random ingredient of rain, which arrived on lap 21.



A line of cars peeled into the pits. The equation was further complicated by the unusual way the rain fell. In these parts a tropical downpour does not normally come in spots and spits. It just tips down. Not yesterday.



To go to intermediate tyres or to gamble on wets? That was the question. Some plumped for the first, others for the latter as the skies made meteorologists of us all. Even Michael Schumacher, the seven-time world champion, stepped from the Ferrari throng to put his hand out and test the shower.



All the while, Button was in command but the nagging doubts remained in the gloaming. Would the deluge arrive? Even if it did not, was it too dark to continue this twilight race?



What a deluge: BMW Sauber driver Nick Heidfeld gets out of his car while Lewis Hamilton sits in the cockpit under an umbrella

By lap 30, the first spray was rising off the track. One clanking clap of thunder and the TV screens briefly flickered off in the media room. Button changed rubber, from intermediates back to wets. Soon there was a river running. The safety car came out.



‘It’s undriveable,’ crackled Sebastien Bourdais from his Toro Rosso cockpit. Giancarlo Fisichella’s Force India and Sebastian Vettel’s Red Bull spun off. One hour and two minutes after the start, the red flag was waved. The cars congregated on the grid. There was talk of a re-start, but surely there was too little illumination to continue in safety, even if the rain relented and the track dried enough.



Rubens Barrichello, Button’s team-mate, was kept dry by the team draping a tarpaulin over him and his sodden machine. Mark Webber, the Red Bull driver and leading member of the Grand Prix Drivers’ Association, looked stonyfaced as he wandered about under an umbrella canvassing the views of his peers. Did they want a re-start?



‘The feeling was unanimous,’ he reported afterwards. ‘It was too dangerous to go on.’



One fan huddled under a cardboard box in the muggy heat. Others, bare-chested, used the bank as a slide. Incongruously, back at the Ferrari hospitality area Kimi Raikkonen grabbed an ice cream. A problem with the green technology, which redeploys energy lost under braking into extra power, meant his participation was over.



Two for two: Jenson Button celebrates his second Grand Prix win of the season

Still he and his team-mate Felipe Massa have not scored a championship point. Cut to panic at Ferrari HQ.



Back outside it was growing marginally brighter, yet 50 minutes after the red flag arrived, it was announced that the afternoon’s entertainment was over.



The podium classification was untangled as follows: Button, Nick Heidfeld, of BMW, and Timo Glock, of Toyota. Because less than three-quarters of the race was completed, all the top eight received half points. It means that Button heads the drivers’ standings by five points over Barrichello.



None of the competitors were blaming the chaotic scenes on F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone’s decision to push back the start time from early afternoon to 5pm to cater for the European TV audience.



‘It was dark because of the thunderstorms, not because of the timing,’ said Renault’s former double world champion, Fernando Alonso. ‘It was a shame for the spectators. They only saw half a race. But the decision was right. Otherwise, we could have had a big accident we would regret.’







For Lewis Hamilton it seems that it never rains, but it pours. This weekend marked the lowest point in his career. It started with him being thrown out of the opening race in Melbourne for fabricating evidence he gave to the stewards. He apologised and was chastened.



And if confirmation were needed that his McLaren is struggling for pace, it was provided here. He was classified seventh, which was news to him. He thought he was fifth until he was set straight.









‘By the time we stopped, it was too dangerous,’ said Hamilton, who scored his team’s first point. ‘It was impossible to drive so it was the right decision to stop. The car was aqua-planing everywhere. I think it was the toughest conditions I have ever raced in.



‘It has been a terrible few days. You know why. All I did was give it my best shot today and the results were not terrible.’



For Button, the focus now turns to Paris tomorrow week when the legality of his car’s diffuser will be determined. If the FIA court of appeal decide there is nothing wrong with the controversial device, it is hard to see anyone touching him this season.



That was the overwhelming truth on an afternoon of manic theatre.