Broadchurch star Olivia Colman will the first ever female 007 - Jane Bond
Lined up for the role after impressing as Angela Burr in The Night Manager
She impressed Bond producer Barbara Broccoli with performance as spy
Co-star Tom Hiddleston and Poldark Aidan Turner were favourites before

By Lorraine Fisher for the Daily Mail

Published: 00:01, 1 April 2016 | Updated: 15:23, 1 April 2016

e-mail

7.4k
shares

917

View comments

The name’s Bond... Jane Bond. Broadchurch star Olivia Colman is set to make history by becoming the first female 007.

The Daily Mail can exclusively reveal that 42-year-old Miss Colman will take over from Daniel Craig for the next movie – currently known only as Bond 25 – in a controversial move sure to outrage many diehard fans.

She won the role after impressing producer Barbara Broccoli with her portrayal of spymaster Angela Burr in BBC1’s The Night Manager, which ended on Sunday.

Scroll down for video
Jane Bond: Olivia Colman has been lined up to replace Daniel Craig and play the first ever female 007
It comes after Craig said he would rather slash his wrists than play the role again

Jane Bond: Olivia Colman has been lined up to replace Daniel Craig and play the first ever female 007
She won the role after impressing producer Barbara Broccoli with her portrayal of spymaster Angela Burr (second from left), alongside Tom Hiddleston, a previous favourite, in BBC1’s The Night Manager

She won the role after impressing producer Barbara Broccoli with her portrayal of spymaster Angela Burr (second from left), alongside Tom Hiddleston, a previous favourite, in BBC1’s The Night Manager

‘Barbara was blown away by her performance as a hard, determined yet compassionate spook,’ said a source. ‘She feels after years of cold, emotionless Bonds, it’s time to introduce someone with real humanity behind the steel.’

Speculation about who will play Ian Fleming’s most famous creation had been rife since Craig announced last year he would rather ‘slash his wrists’ than reprise the role. Tom Hiddleston, Miss Colman’s co-star in the Night Manager, had been tipped as the next Bond, with Poldark’s Aidan Turner and Luther’s Idris Elba also believed to be in the running.
RELATED ARTICLES

Previous
1
Next

Haven't I seen you somewhere before! How the same actors...
Lucy Mecklenburgh looks sensational as she flaunts her...

Share this article
Share

Mother-of-three Miss Colman, who has also starred in Peep Show and Rev, has been in talks with Bond producers for the past few weeks. She was told on Monday she had secured the part.

‘Olivia couldn’t believe it, she thought it was a joke at first,’ said a close friend. ‘It’s the dream job that every actor in Britain wanted and she was over the moon to land it. But it’s not just that.

‘Olivia’s no fool – she knows it will raise her profile abroad and lead to better, and more lucrative, film offers. Olivia knows it’s now time to prove herself to the rest of the world. She had her third baby less than eight months ago but is determined to get in shape and prove she can do the stunts just as well as any man.’

Yesterday Bond 25 associate producer Flora Pilo said: ‘We can’t yet confirm who will be taking over from Daniel Craig. An announcement will be made in due course.’

Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3518227/Now-S-real-Bond-girl-O-O-Olivia-Coleman-lined-play-007-Broadchurch-star-set-make-history-taking-Daniel-Craig-movie.html#ixzz4VIp24DSf
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook
