Hundreds of newborn babies could be saved if mothers breastfeed, claims report



Hundreds of newborn babies would be saved each year if more women breastfed their children, a report said



Hundreds of newborn babies would be saved each year if more women breastfed their children, according to a report.

The U.S. cost analysis said that the deaths of nearly 900 babies would be prevented each year, along with billions of dollars, if 90per cent of American women breastfed their babies for the first six months of life.



Those results, published online in the journal Pediatrics, were only an estimate, but several experts confirmed the findings.

'The health care system has got to be aware that breast-feeding makes a profound difference,' said Dr Ruth Lawrence, who heads the American Academy of Pediatrics' breastfeeding section.

The report suggests that there are hundreds of deaths and many more costly illnesses each year from health problems that breastfeeding could help prevent.

These include stomach viruses, ear infections, asthma, juvenile diabetes, Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and even childhood leukemia.

The magnitude of health benefits linked to breastfeeding is vastly under-appreciated, said lead author Dr Melissa Bartick, of Harvard Medical School.



Among the benefits are that breast milk contains antibodies which help babies fight infections. It can also affect insulin levels in the blood, which may make breastfed babies less likely to develop diabetes and obesity.

Some 80per cent of mothers attempt breastfeeding in the UK but after six months that number has dropped to around 22per cent.

The analysis studied the prevalence of 10 common childhood illnesses, costs of treating those diseases, including hospitalisation, and the level of disease protection other studies have linked with breastfeeding.

The $13 billion in estimated losses due to the low breast-feeding rate includes an economists' calculation partly based on lost potential lifetime wages - $10.56 million per death.

The methods were similar to a widely cited 2001 government report that said $3.6 billion could be saved each year if 50per cent of mothers breastfed their babies for six months.



About 43per cent of U.S. mothers do at least some breastfeeding for six months, but only 12per cent follow government guidelines recommending that babies receive only breast milk for six months.

Dr Larry Gray, a University of Chicago pediatrician,said the analysis was 'compelling'.



But he said mothers who do not breastfeed for six months should not be blamed or made to feel guilty, because their jobs and other demands often make it impossible to do so.

'We'd all love as pediatricians to be able to carry this information into the boardrooms by saying we all gain by small changes at the workplace,' he said.