

LOS ANGELES - One of the American Idol final eleven contestants has finally decided to come forward and address some rumors that have been floating around for a few weeks now.

Scotty McCreery, 17, recently called a press conference and told the members of the assembled media that he wanted to clear up a horrible rumor that has been making the rounds of GossipLand USA.

McCreery who resides in Garner, North Carolina stated in no uncertain terms that he is not the illegitimate or even legitimate son of former President George  <quote> "WMD" </quote>  Bush.

Scotty did admit that he has seen photos of President Bush when he was in his late teens and although there is quite a resemblance the fact of the matter is that there is no biological connection between the two, mentally, emotionally, hypothetically, or intellectually.

McCreerdy says that he read on the Internet where Bush's IQ is 98, whereas his (Scotty's) is 117. Scotty also pointed out another very important difference which should really put all of the rumors to rest once and for all and that is the fact that he loves playing sports especially baseball, whereas Georgy Bush was a cheerleader in college.

Scotty laughed and pointed out that even though both he and Bush have each shouted out  <quote> "Go team go," </quote>  he, unlike, Bush did it without using pom-poms and a cheerleaders megaphone.

The young North Carolina native also stated that his political views are totally the opposite of Bush's. He went on to say that there are however two things that they both agree on. Both think that Senator John McCain has the silliest hair 'comb over' in America.

And both certainly agree that Sarah  <quote> "Snowflake" </quote>  Palin needs to talk to 16-year-old daughter Willow more about trying to figure out a way to keep the hormone-crazed teenage boys at bay than about teaching her how to shoot the livin' daylights out of a caribou.

In other news. People are starting to wonder what the heck is going on with Naomi Campbell. Eye witnesses reported seeing her walking down Broadway Street in New York and all of a sudden she started kicking the heck out of her own shadow.
