InnoVoc Solutions, a division of Gordon Composites (Montrose, Colo.), announced on Feb. 16 the availability of what it calls breakthrough technology for powder coating of plastics, composites and other nonconductive substrates. The licensed technology makes nonmetallic substrates temporarily conductive, using a proprietary surface treatment that emits no VOCs or other hazardous byproducts.

The company’s trademarked technology provides a hard finish that is typically tougher than conventional liquid paint, using a low-cost process suitable for both automated inline coating and batch-booth quantities. The method produces composite parts that can be affixed to adjacent powder-coated metal parts, such as appliance handles and automotive parts.

Kevin Stay, president and general manager of Gordon Composites, says the technology used by InnoVoc Solutions is easy to implement and inexpensive.  <quote> “Before the development of this technology, powder coating nonmetallic surfaces was possible, but the processes had manufacturing, cost and environmental limitations that restricted their use,” </quote>  explains Stay.  <quote> “Powder coating is applied electrostatically, as a free-flowing, dry powder, and is then cured under heat to allow it to flow and cure. We can use the InnoVoc process with any engineered plastic that withstands cure temperatures in the range of 250 to 400°F [121 to 204°C].” </quote> 

InnoVoc’s technology was developed for high-performance composite limbs on modern archery bows. Composite limbs are attached to robust powder-coated aluminum risers and need to have the same appearance and durability as the riser.  <quote> “With the new technology, we are able to use the same powder coating on both the aluminum risers and the composite limbs so they appear, and age, the same,” </quote>  says Stay. Reportedly, the bond between the coating and limb is so strong that bow fatigue performance improves significantly. Other successful applications include automotive parts, electrical switch plates and handles for appliances.