One of the great things about TwitterTwitter reviews is that it is a great place to track emerging trends. When major events or big stories occur, people tweet about it and it inevitably ends up at the top of Twitter Search as a top trend. But this only scratches the surface of tracking Twitter trends.

There are a wide variety of web applications, Twitter accounts, and even iPhone apps that can help people do everything from track popular hashtags to graph out recent Twitter trends. As Twitter grows, this information will only become more useful for understanding what is popular at any given moment, or even what was popular in the past.

Web-based Applications









1. Twitter Search: The simplest way to see trends on Twitter is on their official search page. Hot trends on Twitter appear on the search page and on the Twitter homepage, and clicking any will bring up a feed of the public conversation.

2. Twist: For those who are visual, Twist provides a graphical interface to see trends and keywords on Twitter. It not only lists out the hot trends over the last few hours, days, and week, but it provides embeddable charts and the ability to compare trends.

3. Monitter: Monitter is one of the best ways to track trends in real-time. Type in keywords and it will automatically update with the most recent tweets containing those terms. Add or remove columns to give you the right amount of information.

4. Hashtags.org: The popular webpage on Twitter hashtags also provides graphs on hashtag use just by hovering over the hashtag. There are also pages that show the most popular and newest hashtags, but their uptime is unreliable.

5. Tweetmeme: Looking for the most popular links on Twitter? Tweetmeme is the epicenter link sharing on the service.

6. Plodt: This website is a user-generated trend tracker based on tagging and ranking your tweets. It requires you to follow the Plodt Twitter account to participate. But even without participating, its timelines, tags, and statistics are still useful and interesting.

7. Twitturly: Twitturly is another way to track top-shared URLs. The interface allows users to see all of the active tweets that have shared a specific link.

Twitter Accounts









8. twithority: Twithority is an easy way to have the most recent Twitter trends tweeted to you. The links provide a view of Twitter trends based on both time and  <quote> "authority." </quote> 

9. TweetingTrends: TweetingTrends is an even simpler way to keep up with Twitter Trends. Links go directly to Twitter Search.

10. PowerSearch: PowerSearch not only tweets about emerging trends, but daily and weekly trends that you may have missed out on.

11. gtrend: gtrend is short for  <quote> "Google Trend." </quote>  It updates users on the most recent trends within Google Search. Follow this account to know about trends across the wider web. No, this doesn't track Twitter trends, but it's a great way to compare trends.

iPhone Apps









12. Retweet [iTunes Link]: Retweet, which we have previously reviewed, provides a simple iPhone interface for reading top retweets, links, and retweeting them out yourself. It costs 99 cents.

13. TweetieTweetie reviews [iTunes Link]: Did you know that this popular Twitter also has a section that displays what is currently trending on Twitter? Not only that, but you can save trending items as well.

14. Twitter Trend [iTunes Link]: This free application provides a simple tag cloud for looking at hot, rising, or emerging trends on Twitter.

15. Summizer [iTunes Link]: Summizer is an advanced query Twitter search tool. It allows users to view trending topics or find specific types of tweets, i.e. Tweets sent by or from a specific person, or tweets that don't include specific words. Summizer has both a paid and a free version.

How Do You Track Twitter Trends?

Do you have tips, tricks and tools for tracking Twitter trends? Let us know in the comments!