BREAKING NEWS: Amazing news for those disappointed in Supreme Commander 2 and Spring's efforts to create a true sequel to Total Annihilation, Phantagram, a Korean company, has recently announced that they will be releasing TA2 in August of THIS YEAR!

SEOUL--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Behold Commanders, war is soon upon us. Phantagram Ltd. (판타그램), maker of award-winning Kingdom Under Fire (킹덤언더파이어) series, today announced that, after 7 years of development, it is finally close to bringing us the sequel to the award-winning 1997 RTS title Total Annihilation™. Shipping in August 2010, Total Annihilation 2™ (토탈 어나힐레이션 2™) will introduce a multitude of innovations to the to the classic fast and fluid Total Annihilation gameplay while retaining the core compulsions that fans have come to love over the game's epic history. Introducing new class-based gameplay, mobile bases and persistent player progression throughout all game modes, Total Annihilation 2 offers players new, innovative and compelling strategic depth.

 <quote> “Total Annihilation is a powerful franchise with an amazing 12-year legacy. We are thrilled to bring RTS fans more innovation, more strategy, and more depth in its sequel. This game is designed to give fans all the answers they've been looking for,” </quote>  said SangYoun Lee (이상윤), Lead Producer of Total Annihilation 2 and CEO of Phantagram.  <quote> “With its objective-based multiplayer mode, persistent player progression and all-in-one mobile base, players will experience Total Annihilation like never before.” </quote> 

The story of Total Annihilation 2 takes place thousands of years prior to the critically acclaimed Total Annihilation and The Core Contingency™. The year is 2262 and humanity is at the brink of civil war. Against the background of disunity and chaos following the mandated transfer of consciousness from flesh to machines, society polarizes into two opposing factions. Those who wish for immortality in the circuitry of machines form the Core Empire (코어), and those who view this act as an abomination splinter into the Arm Rebellion (암). Total Annihilation 2 draws the epic beginning to the beloved Total Annihilation saga, where fans will experience the start of the war which has decimated a million worlds.

In addition to the two campaigns on the epic battles of Core and Arm, which players will get to annihilate alone or in a cooperative mode, Total Annihilation 2 will also feature a new 5v5 objective-based multiplayer mode, promoting teamwork and cooperation and delivering a social real-time-strategy experience never seen before in an RTS game.

However, the release will apparently be done in Korean, with releases in other languages subsequently in 2012.

Total Annihilation 2 is being developed at Phantagram Seoul and will ship to Korean retailers in August 2010 for the PC, with international releases scheduled for first quarter 2012. The game has not yet been rated by the ESRB or PEGI. For more information about the game, please visit www.phantagram.com or follow the community and development team on Twitter at http://twitter.com/volstory. The July 24th episode of 엠비씨게임's 한승연의 MSL Break will give fans the latest news and exclusive information on Total Annihilation 2. Additionally, Gametrailers TV will exclusively reveal the first cinematic trailer for Total Annihilation 2 in its March 25th episode on SPIKE TV.

TAU will post continuous updates as more information is released. Stay tuned! In the mean time, Every true TA fan will be improving their proficiency in Korean .

Update: more links:

Total Annihilation 2 Interview - ShackNews
Total Annihilation 2 confirmed - GameSpot
Total Annihilation Sequel? - IGN
Total Annihilation Sequel Announced for PC - Inside Mac Games
Total Annihilation Sequel Announced
Total Annihilation 2 under development
Phantagram trabaja en Total Annihilation 2

Update 2: Tomcat_ha, a member of the board, revealed to us that a closed beta for play-testers and select community representatives has been hosted by Phantagrams on their new game-matching service since early February. Due to a non-disclosure agreement in effect, TAU is unable to gather or post any further information at this time, but this is surely an exciting development.
