WARMINSTER goalkeeper Justin Shuttlewood will be glad to see the back of US Portsmouth after shipping 10 goals in two games against the South coast side this season.

Shuttlewood, who replaced regular gloveman Adam Collington for last night's trip, was beaten four times on a miserable night for Peter Russell's side.

He conceded six against the same opposition on the opening day of the season, when Warminster were handed a baptism of fire in a 6-2 rout at Weymouth Street.

Said Russell:  <quote> "We had a bit of a joke with Jutty about it afterwards, but to be fair to him he made one or two good saves.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "It's never ideal to be going to Portsmouth on a Tuesday night and we could barely scrape a team together.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "We only had two substitutes and one of those was my lad, Graham, who couldn't have come on anyway because he's injured.
 </quote> 
 <quote> "Portsmouth have about 80 players on their books because so many of them are in the services. I just wished they were all out at sea on Tuesday." </quote> 

Goals from Mark Robinson, Gary Thomas, Gary Barnes and Dave Hazelgrove secured the points for Portsmouth.

Andover New Street 1, Warminster Town 3

THE scoreline may have flattered the visitors but Saturday's win was a welcome tonic after a difficult few weeks for Warminster.

Andover battled but were ultimately undone by the superior finishing of their opponents.

Matthew Guy lobbed Warminster into a 25th minute lead with a piece of opportune finishing after a mix-up in the home defence.

Sprightly winger Tom Welch added a second 10 minutes later after a lovely one-two with Louis Sparey on the edge of the Andover penalty box.

The hosts were thrown a lifeline early in the second half when Warminster defender Simon Mead gave away a penalty.

Andover converted from the spot, but the visitors made the game safe with five minutes to play with a penalty of their own.

Tom Malcolm was flattened by the home goalkeeper and Ashley Wain slotted home from 12 yards.

Next up for Warminster is Stockbridge at home on Saturday before a difficult trip to Shaftesbury on Wednesday night.