Retro hardware manufacturer Analogue is now accepting reservations for a 24-karat gold-plated Nintendo Entertainment System aimed at the collector's market.

Only the wealthiest fans of Nintendo's 8-bit output need apply for Analogue's limited-edition NES model, however. Only 10 of the console are being produced, priced at $5,000 each.

To soften the blow, Analogue will throw in a free cartridge of Nintendo's The Legend of Zelda (valued at upwards of $30) with every order. All units are made-to-order with either RGB or HDMI output, at the buyer's discretion.

Aside from its gold-plated exterior, the limited edition unit is otherwise identical to the Analogue Nt aluminum model, priced at a comparatively modest $500. Built using refurbished and recovered Nintendo Entertainment System hardware, the Analogue Nt upgrades the 8-bit system's video output to support modern formats like RGB, component, and s-video, in addition to a standard composite signal.

An optional HDMI upgrade kit allows the Analogue Nt to be plugged directly into modern HDTVs, automatically upscaling output to 720p or 1080p with no noticeable input lag.

Related Offer: See more from Nintendo here

While NES clones are usually dirt-cheap, software compatibility for bootlegged hardware often comes up short. The Analogue Nt is built out of original, Nintendo-developed components, ensuring the highest possible compatibility with the Nintendo Entertainment System's software library. The unit additionally features two cartridge slots, enabling support for both NES games and Japanese Famicom software.

The Analogue Nt also pitches itself as an ideal solution for audiophiles, promising adjustable mono and stereo sound, free from the noise and interference associated with the stock NES's RF and composite output. Other bundled features include four controller ports, compatibility with Famicom expansion audio, and support for the Japan-only Famicom Disk System, via an expansion port.

The unit's $500 model is currently out of stock at Analogue's website, making the gold-plated edition your only option at the moment if you're in the market for a high-end NES. Is it worth the asking price?