The University of Queensland has again been confirmed in the top global tier of universities in the first ever QS World University Rankings® for technical subjects.

UQ was listed in the top 50 in the world for chemical engineering (world rank 29), civil and structural engineering (world rank =34) and computer science and information systems (48).

It was also ranked in the top 100 in electrical and electronic engineering, and mechanical, aeronautical and manufacturing engineering

Rankings were based on a methodology that included academic reputation, employer reputation, and the number of citations per paper.

This result correlates with UQ's 43rd overall ranking in the top 200 QS World University Rankings® in 2010, placing UQ among the top one percent of more than 9000 international universities.

QS has advised it will rank 30 subjects in coming weeks on www.topuniversities.com, along with a personalised ranking tool to help students.

UQ Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research) Professor Max Lu, who is a chemical engineer with research expertise in the areas of materials chemistry and nanotechnology, said he was delighted with the University's strong performance in the latest rankings, which was consistent with all recent global rankings.

 <quote> “UQ's Bachelor of Engineering and Bachelor of Information Technology are the leading programs in their field in Queensland,” </quote>  Professor Lu said.

 <quote> “Graduates of these programs will enter the workforce providing much-needed expertise to a wide range of companies across many sectors including construction, IT, resources and power.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “UQ's programs provide students with the strongest possible foundation for their careers by ensuring that they develop strong theoretical knowledge and practical skills in every stage of their degrees.
 </quote> 
 <quote> “The University's capacity for quality research has enabled significant research outcomes and a very high level of industry collaboration, and is testament to the first-class academic and research staff and students involved in engineering and IT research across UQ.” </quote> 

Professor Lu said with the support of industry and other partners, there were now 18 different undergraduate engineering specialisations at UQ, the largest number offered by any university in Queensland.

UQ's strength in this area was also recognised by the recent Times Higher Education World University Rankings, in which UQ was one of only two Australian universities to be ranked in the top 50 universities in the world for engineering and technology.

The Times Higher Education World Reputation Rankings 2011, which were published last month, lists four Australian universities - UQ, the University of Melbourne, University of Sydney and The Australian National University - in its top 100 universities worldwide.

UQ received 81st ranking in the Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2010-2011 released last September.

UQ ranked among the top 18 universities in the Asia-Pacific region and 108th worldwide in the 2010 Academic Rankings of World Universities study conducted by Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

The Australian Government's recent Excellence in Research for Australia study showed that more researchers at UQ are working in research fields that have been assessed above world standard than at any other Australian university. The national research evaluation listed UQ as one of the top three engineering universities in Australia.

The University has more than 1000 academic and research staff and students who conduct applied and fundamental engineering research in areas of critical importance – from renewable energy and medical diagnostic technologies to bioengineering and nanotechnology, smart machines, mining and metallurgy, power systems, hypersonics and light alloys.

To learn more about studying engineering or information technology at UQ, please visit www.uq.edu.au/study
