LOS ALAMOS, N.M.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jemez Technology announced today that it has named Brian Thomas as Chief Executive Officer (CEO), effective immediately. As Jemez and the video-surveillance industry ramp up for increased demand, Mr. Thomas will be a key asset to the company with his demonstrated knowledge and leadership skills to manage unprecedented growth without compromising customer satisfaction, company culture or employee commitment.

Mr. Thomas previously was the CEO of OtterBox®-Lifeproof. In that position, Mr. Thomas oversaw growth from $2 million to over $1 billion in revenue, as recognized by several industry awards, including Mid-market CEO of the Year in 2014 by CEO Connection, Top 100 CEO’s in America by Chief Executive Magazine as well as Great Places to Work for the final two years of his leadership by Forbes Magazine.

 <quote> “The security of our nation’s critical infrastructure is becoming an increasingly important issue given recent world events, and this trend is driving significant demand for Jemez Technology’s state-of-the-art video surveillance products and services. Brian is uniquely qualified to lead our company during a time of rapidly growing demand for mission-critical security solutions. Brian is a world-class leader and a perfect fit for our culture, values and vision for growing our company,” </quote>  said Mel Duran, Jemez Technology’s co-founder and Chief Technology Officer.

Jemez Technology was recently named Technology Integration Partner of the Year by Axis Communications at its 10th annual Axis Connect & Converge Conference (ACCC). Axis, the global leader in network video, presented these annual awards to top channel, software and technology partners.

 <quote> “On behalf of Axis Communications, I would like to congratulate Brian on his new role. We look forward to collaborating with him on future initiatives,” </quote>  said Alex Walthers, business development manager, Application Development Program, at Axis Communications, Inc.  <quote> “We are proud to have named Jemez, Technology Integration Partner of the Year during ACCC as they have continued to push innovation forward with their best-in-class critical infrastructure protection solutions.” </quote> 

Visit Jemez Technology April 6-8, 2016, in Las Vegas, Nevada at the International Security Conference and Exhibition (ISC West).

Jemez Technology’s Eagle-i Edge™ incorporates the power of field-proven image processing technology into a powerful and highly-accurate perimeter surveillance offering that until now has not been possible as an embedded edge-based camera application.

About Jemez Technology

Jemez Technology provides state-of-the-art video surveillance technology delivering dramatically enhanced perimeter and area surveillance for critical asset and infrastructure protection. The company was founded by former scientists from the Los Alamos National Laboratory, bringing decades of national security experience to its products and services. www.jemeztechnology.com

