The film industry in the Caribbean took a step in the right direction this month. In seven days, the much-buzzed-about CaribbeanTales 2011 Film Festival came to a close.

The event celebrated the exploding film and television industry across the Caribbean region and it's diaspora.

Filmmakers and film enthusiasts from the region and the world came together for a week of cultural celebration which took place at the Island Inn and George Washington House in Bridgetown, Barbados.

The festival's gala opening, on March 16 at Frank Collymore Hall, was held before a capacity audience of 500 patrons.

And at the closing night screening of Raoul Peck's Moloch Tropical, CaribbeanTales CEO Frances-Anne Solomon thanked participants and sponsors for making this year's theme, 'Vision Momentum Action! 'a huge success.

tremendous support

 <quote> "Even though it was very hard work, in a lean year, the support we have had has been tremendous," </quote>  she said.

 <quote> "The payoff is a satisfied and nourished audience base, stimulated by rich dialogue about our industry. This will carry our team forward for a long time to come," </quote>  she continued.

The festival's highlight was the unique CT Content Incubator, facilitated by United States marketing and distribution consultant, Michele Matterre, with a special animation incubator led by Camille Selvon Abrahams of Anime Caribe.

Selected filmmakers participated in an intensive immersion in the creative, business and marketing aspects of the industry, with support from international industry experts, culminating in a pitch session.

Another highlight was the CT Symposium that provided a comprehensive overview of the regional industry, starting with a wonderful and inspired keynote address delivered by Mia Mottley.

Many special guests travelled from abroad to take part in the activities, including Hollywood director Neema Barnette, Berlinale Talent Campus Director Mattijs Knol, World Cinema Fund Director Sonja Heinen, Africa Channel executive vice-president of Corporate Affairs Mark Watson, Kethiwe Ngcobo, head of drama at the South African Broadcasting Corporation and award-winning Canadian composer, John Welsman, who delivered a master class on sound and music for film.

The week also included an awards ceremony honouring special guest, Hollywood director Neema Barnette.

This was followed by the world premiere screening of Howard and Mitzi Allen's eagerly anticipated fourth feature film, The Skin, followed by a rap session with the filmmakers.

important for filmmakers

Barnette, who arrived from Los Angeles to receive the award, spoke movingly of the importance of the CaribbeanTales.

 <quote> "For someone who has worked hard for everything I have ever got, it is wonderful to see what this festival provides for filmmakers," </quote>  she said.

Allen said it was important to herself and her husband, filmmaker director Howard Allen, to present the film at CaribbeanTales, even though it was not quite finished.

 <quote> "I really liked the feedback we got from industry folks. It was honest and constructive. A pre-screening outside of Antigua was the best thing we ever did," </quote>  said Allen, who is the executive producer for the film.

Most of the films screened to sold-out audiences at the George Washington House cinema. These featured some local, regional and international premieres, including Miquel Jalofre's extraordinary exploration of Jamaican dancehall music, Hit Me With Music, and the stunning series premiere of Dominion by Bajan dream team Sean Michael Field and Rodney Smith.



