Historic West Norfolk theatre where Shakespeare performed is set to re-open as trustees outline plans for the future.

The future of a historic venue for the arts in Norfolk has been outlined by the volunteers who saved it from closure.

The complex, including a theatre where Shakespeare performed, is set to be brought back to life with a range of events and attractions.

The volunteers' efforts have attracted the support of celebrity patrons - including the Antique Roadshow's Mark Hill, it was revealed on Saturday.

King's Lynn's Arts Centre had the rug pulled from under it last year when West Norfolk council said it was closing the doors for good as part of a cost-cutting measure.

But supporters launched a huge campaign to save it and are taking over the management of the three galleries after presenting a business plan to the council to prove it could successfully stay open for the future.

Trustees, friends and supporters of the centre met on Saturday when plans for the future were unveiled prior to announcing the winners of the Eastern Open competition. The new management team is aiming to make the centre a top venue for the arts and hopes to also take over the medieval St George's Guildhall, part of the King Street complex, where it is believed Shakespeare performed.

The theatre will be rented by the Arts Centre from the borough council for a year, but at the end of it the trustees hope to take it over completely, apply for Lottery funding to renovate the building and make it a centre-piece for the town.

Chairman of the trustees Alan Taylor said the passion and enthusiasm for the Arts Centre had ensured Lynn did not lose a jewel in its crown.

 <quote> “It is not just about visual arts, hanging a few paintings on a wall, but about working with young people to inspire them and creating a facility for education. A tremendous amount of hard work has been put in to get things this far and there is much more to come, but we are looking forward to a bright future,” </quote>  he said.

 <quote> “The passion of everyone working on this project has been incredible and without the efforts of everyone involved we would never have got this far,” </quote>  he added.

Former High Sheriff of Norfolk Sir Jeremy Bagge, of the Stradsett Estate, said he was delighted the Arts Centre would continue to be a part of the town.

 <quote> “It is such an important part of the town and is a beautiful building,” </quote>  he said.

The buildings have a historic connection to his family which used to own part of the complex once used as warehousing.

Arts and education manager Liz Falconbridge said the Arts Centre was a resource which could help attract more toursits to the area.

 <quote> “Three hundred people will be coming in today for the Eastern Open and we have great plans for many more projects to bring people here,” </quote>  she said.

The centre is already used for a number of educational purposes, including artists working one-to-one with teenagers who are not in school through either illness or issues including bullying and the trustees hope to expand on the theme.

 <quote> “We have four wonderful apprentices here already and they are great ambassadors.” </quote> 
