Draxis Health Inc. has struck a US$255-million friendly deal to be taken over by Jubilant Organosys Ltd., a publicly traded company from India that is offering US$6 per share for the Canadian drug producer. The deal, announced Friday, is the second takeover of a well-known Canadian company by an Indian firm as corporations in the fast-growing Indian economy flex their expansion muscles and look beyond Asia to grow their international business. Last year, Algoma Steel was bought by India's Essar Steel for $1.85 billion, continuing a wave of consolidation that has left the Canadian steel sector in foreign hands. Indian companies have also been said to be examining whether to invest in oilsands properties in northern Alberta. The proposed acquisition of Draxis (TSX: DAX) represents a 22.4 per cent premium over Thursday's closing price for the company, which has a generic version of Cardiolite, a commonly used drug for nuclear medicine imaging. It had acknowledged last month that it was in talks with a potential buyer.  <quote> "Draxis represents a unique opportunity in the North American market, offering Jubilant entry into the attractive, regulated, high growth and high margin radiopharmaceutical business," </quote>  Shyam Bhartia, chairman and managing director of the Indian company, said in a release.

 <quote> "It also enables Jubilant to consolidate its position in the sterile and non-sterile contract manufacturing business. With this acquisition Jubilant will become one of the leading providers of contract manufacturing of small volume parenterals to large pharmaceuticals and biotech companies in North America. Draxis has an excellent regulatory track record, with its management and employees having a wealth of experience and expertise in radiopharmaceuticals and contract manufacturing. " </quote> Jubilant is committed to grow Draxis by supporting management and employees through new product launches, entry into new markets and expansion of customer base. <quote> " Jubilant Organosys is an integrated pharmaceutical company, involved in research, development and manufacturing. In addition to several locations in India, it has two in the United States – in Maryland and Washington state.
 </quote> 
The Draxis board of directors is recommending that shareholders accept the offer. Analysts were quick to say the offering price was somewhat below their target prices for a takeover of Draxis, but that they saw a good fit between the two companies. Desjardins Securities analyst Maher Yaghi wrote Friday that that, by his calculations, Draxis could be valued at about US$6.60 per share if the various parts of its business were considered separately.  <quote> "While Jubilant's offer is nine per cent below our assessed takeout valuation, we believe this opportunity provides fair value to current investors regardless, given the risks involved with the approval and launch of generic sestamibi (Cardiolite) in the U.S. and the potential volatility in Draxis Pharma's base business considering a possible phase-out in 2009 of Hectorol, currently the company's greatest revenue contributor." </quote>  Hectorol is used to treat patients with kidney disease. In its most recent financial report, Draxis said Hectorol production volumes in last year were $9 million lower than they were in 2006 and significantly lower than what was originally forecasted for 2007. Yaghi wrote that Draxis could opt out of its agreement with Jubilant after paying a break fee of US$10.5 million but  <quote> "we believe it is unlikely that another potential buyer would emerge immediately to provide a superior counter bid." </quote>  Doug Loe, an analyst with Versant Partners Inc., said that while the bid for Draxis is attractive, it is below the broker's one year target of $7.50 per share for the Toronto company.  <quote> "What we know about Jubilant to this point is that it looks as though it's a pharmaceutical and drugs development services and industrial chemicals conglomerate that could effectively integrate Draxis's capabilities in contract manufacturing and nuclear medicine," </quote>  Loe said.  <quote> "These are areas of their business that seem to be underdeveloped in comparison to other parts of its business." </quote>  In trading today on the TSX, Draxis shares rose $1.01 to $5.95, a gain of 20.5 per cent in trading of more than 822,000 shares.
