Researchers at Leicester's De Montfort University found that 319 of the 632 seats in England, Scotland and Wales are likely to have ''grey majorities'' turning out to vote - including 94 of the marginal constituencies which will determine the result.

Overall, four out of 10 votes across the country will be cast by over-55s, said Dr Scott Davidson, who led the study.

The figures emerged as charity Age UK launched its Our Power is Our Number campaign, urging older people to use their vote and ensure candidates engage with issues which are important to them.

Michelle Mitchell, charity director of Age UK - formed by the merger of Age Concern England with Help the Aged - said: ''The success of any party in this election depends on their commitment to act on the issues which are most important to older people, who are more likely to vote than any other age group.

''Older people are fed up with second-class services and we will support them to demand action from their local candidates on care, age discrimination, the NHS and pensions.''

Today's report found that, of the 94 constituencies with majorities under 5,000 where older people are likely to form a majority of voters, 38 are held by Labour, 34 by the Conservatives, 19 by the Liberal Democrats, two by the Scottish National Party and one by an Independent.

The biggest grey vote is expected in the Conservative safe seat of Christchurch, Dorset, where the DMU survey predicts 70.9 per cent of those going to the polls will be aged over 55. It is followed by Clacton in Essex (69 per cent), New Forest West (68.1 per cent), Norfolk North (67.9 per cent) and West Dorset (66.3 per cent).

Battleground seats with a predicted majority of older voters included Sittingbourne & Sheppey in Kent, won by Labour by 79 votes in 2005, with a 50.6 per cent over-55 turnout forecast for this year's election, Clwyd West (Tory majority 133 in 2005, 61.5 per cent over-55s) and Solihull (Lib Dem majority of 279 in 2005, 55.7 per cent over-55s).

Dr Davidson said: ''The research shows most seats in the House of Commons will elect MPs based on a turnout where grey voters are the majority.''

In half of constituencies, over-65s will account for more than one-third of votes cast, rising to 466 seats by the year 2025, he predicted.

Dr Davidson said: ''Britain will soon possess an age profile never seen before in its history.

 <quote> "None of this would be significant if older voters were identical in every way to younger voters. But as we already know, they do differ in their electoral behaviour, they vote in larger numbers, and are more likely to lobby MPs than younger voters.
 </quote> 
''As we age, our experience of society and the issues that impact the most directly on our quality of life shift and change. If older voters perceive one party to be much stronger, or weaker, on one of these ageing issues it could sway a large number of votes.''