The NSW government may change child protection laws after a teacher who was sacked for having an affair with a student was awarded almost $28,000 compensation for stress.

The government has also threatened retrospective legislation if its appeal against the decision is not successful.

Jeff Sinclair was removed from the classroom of a Sydney high school in 2001 and given an administrative job after allegations he was having an affair with teenage student Nicki Shackle. He is 33 years her senior.

The couple - who maintained they did not have sex until Ms Shackle turned 16 - now live together in Sydney. She is now 19.

Last year, Mr Sinclair was dismissed from the teaching service.

A two-year departmental investigation into child abuse allegations found Mr Sinclair had breached the trust that is essential between teacher and student.

Following the inquiry, Mr Sinclair sought redress in the NSW Workers Compensation Commission (WCC), claiming the education department's handling of the allegations against him caused him ''psychological injury''.

He claimed he was stressed because he had been taken away from his normal duties without being told why, and was not told for some time.

The commission awarded Mr Sinclair almost $28,000 compensation, saying it was not satisfied he had engaged in ''serious and wilful misconduct'' at the time of the alleged improper relationship.

But the decision has outraged the NSW government and Ms Shackle's family.

The government will urgently appeal against the move.

Education Minster Andrew Refshauge said the government could also amend laws to strengthen the education department's child protection investigation powers, conceding the Sinclair inquiry had been slow.

The minister said it was ridiculous that the government should be penalised for investigating a child-abuse claim while the person under investigation received a payout.

''It's (the decision) out of touch with reality,'' Dr Refshauge told reporters.

''We're going to take it to the Supreme Court if necessary and even if we don't have satisfaction there, we'll be looking at changing the law.''

Premier Bob Carr said it was patently absurd that Mr Sinclair had been compensated for stress caused by a situation that was entirely of his own making.

''In these cases, if someone's arguing stress, it's altogether self-inflicted,'' he said.

Mr Carr said if the appeal failed he would look at retrospective legislation to effectively overturn Mr Sinclair's case.

Mr Shackle's father Stephen said the government had been too slow to act but welcomed the decision to appeal.

''For the last three years they've been absolutely silent on this whole issue ... so I'm really, really pleased that Refshauge's finally doing something,'' Mr Shackle told ABC radio.

Opposition education spokeswoman Jillian Skinner also said the government had taken far too long to address the problem.

AAP