Okay, so it’s been hard to keep it quiet and there have been a few near-leaks along the way, but we can finally confirm that the rumours are true – the world’s first driverless pizza delivery vehicle is here!

You’ve seen Google’s self-driving cars, you’ve seen our drone deliveries with the DomiCopter and now you’re going to see a world first in pizza delivery history as Domino’s introduces the  <quote> “Domi-No-Driver” </quote>  – the world’s first driverless pizza delivery vehicle.

But what does that mean for you, our devoted customers? Well what it boils down to is that as of today, customers placing orders through the Domino’s website and mobile app will soon have the option to have their pizza delivered by the world’s first autonomous delivery vehicle; the #DomiNoDriver.

We can’t wait to see people’s reactions when they order a couple of Meatilicous deep pans and they see a self-driving Domino’s delivery bike rolling up. And, while we love surprising people and pushing boundaries, that’s not the (only) reason we’re making this step in the Domino’s journey.

Phil Zozra, Director of the Domino’s Pizza Redevelopment and New Knowledge division elaborated on the reason behind the latest Domino’s innovation:  <quote> “We’ve been toying with driverless deliveries for a while, but we needed to make sure the tech was able to match up with our ideas. Now that we’ve got the bikes and the automation to the right level, we can’t wait to get the Domi-No-Drivers out on the road.” </quote> 

Zozra went on to say;  <quote> “We’re not doing it just for the ‘wow’ factor, there are a range of innovation benefits too – the space we save by not having a driver means the Domi-No-Driver can carry four times as many pizzas as our previous generation of PDVs (People Driven Vehicles). The fact we’ve developed on the L.I.D.A.R (Light Detection and Ranging) technology used in Google’s driverless cars and equipped our Domi-No-Drivers with H.U.N.G.A.R (Hunger Detection and Ranging) to help them detect and navigate real-time obstacles, shows just how safe and sophisticated they are. We’ve tried to think of it from every angle so all you have to do is place your order and enjoy – hassle free.” </quote> 

Every Domi-No-Driver will also come equipped with Domino’s patented P.I. (Pizza Interface) intelligence that can hone into customers’ coordinates via their smartphones to calculate the most efficient route of delivery and deliver the pizza on the go, completing the effectiveness of the driverless service.

As Simon Wallis, Marketing Director at Domino’s Pizza UK commented:  <quote> “While it’s important that we maintain the handmade touch when it comes to the our pizza production to make sure they’re 100 percent fresh, in the next five years nearly every part of the service industry will be automated and we want to ensure that Domino’s is ahead of that trend. That’s why we are beyond excited to announce that driverless deliveries are becoming a reality at Domino’s thanks to the introduction of the Domi-No-Driver: the world’s first auto-nom-nom-nom-ous delivery vehicle which will soon be coming to a street near you.” </quote> 

Domi-No-Driver_Fullshot_From_Iris

So, noble pizza lovers, while there might not be a need to reinvent the wheel, there’s nothing wrong with putting a bit of thought into what’s attached to those wheels, to make sure that your pizzas are delivered to you even speedier than before.

We’d love to hear what you think, so why not join the conversation and let us know what you think about the new addition to the Domino’s team? #DomiNoDriver
