Bulbanews has received a leaked document containing information on potential upcoming Pokémon games. One alleged title is proof that there is always a little bit of life left in a good console.

The list of games, which was received via email, contains titles for Pokémon games that are intended to hit stores in late 2012 and early 2013. Our source has also mentioned that there is a promotional video of one of the games; Bulbanews will upload it as soon as we receive it.

Update:  A trailer for one of the games has surfaced on YouTube; it has been embedded at the end of this article.
List of titles

Pokémon + Tony Hawk Pro Skater (Japanese: ポケモン＋トニー・ホーク プロスケーター)
Our source alleges that the recently released Japanese title Pokémon + Nobunaga's Ambition will not be translated into English because of the limited awareness of Nobunaga outside of Japan. Instead, an English-only crossover title will be produced. This will combine the Pokémon series with the highly popular Tony Hawk Pro Skater.

Mario Kart Party (Japanese: マリオカートパーティ)
Although Mario Party 9 and Mario Kart 7 are still fresh, new games, it seems that Nintendo is already planning a new installment to the Mario series. This game is said to include elements of both Mario Kart and Mario Party, and will feature unlockable characters from other Nintendo franchises such as Pikachu and Link.

Pokémon Battrio 3DS (Japanese: ポケモンバトリオ３ＤＳ)
Pokémon Battrio is a popular arcade game in Japan. Now it is hoped to bring this popularity to the international stage by releasing a version for Nintendo 3DS. This game is still under development and will hopefully see a 2013 release.

Pokémon Black and White for Game Boy (Japanese: ポケットモンスター ブラック・ホワイト: ゲームボーイ版)
This is perhaps the most surprising title yet. In addition to its upcoming sequels to be released in just over two months, The Pokémon Company is working on a  <quote> "demake" </quote>  of Pokémon Black and White to be released for the original Game Boy system. Our informant was unsure as to why the game was being made for what is deemed to be an  <quote> "outdated" </quote>  system, but is confident that by combining the thrilling storyline of Black and White with a graphical interface once touted as  <quote> "ahead of its time" </quote> , these new (old?) games will sell tremendously.
