Twitter, a mere toddler of a company at five-years-old this month, is arguably the world's second-most popular social networking service after Facebook.

It boasts over 200 million users who send over 65 million 140-character tweets per day. The userbase continues to expand at a phenomenal rate each year and there seems to be no end in sight for its growth. On current form, it's hard to see Twitter sinking under its own weight of irrelevance in a couple of years' time like MySpace and other tech also-rans.


From a standing start and a start-up's standard skeleton crew and budget, Twitter has in five short years smashed all expectations and subsequently attracted the attention of cashed-up Internet behemoths like Google, which is reported to recently have come knocking on Twitter's door. While these figures are always somewhat rubbery, valuation numbers in the vicinity of $8bn and $10bn were rumoured at the time to be in the ballpark.



Despite all this, Twitter -- like many successful Internet start-ups -- is struggling to turn the activity on its network and the eyeballs of its millions of users into profit dollars. Monetisation: an ugly word and a vexed issue; how do you make money from users without destroying the very thing that attracted those users in the first place? In April last year, Twitter took what many thought to be an inevitable step and announced a promoted search feature, effectively granting companies the opportunity to purchase prominence in trend lists and search results but largely leaving users' main streams of content untouched.



How Twitter will eventually make a profit, and how it will bring value to its inevitable purchaser, is the stuff of intense speculation and debate inside technology and business circles. Which is why it's difficult to understand how last week's leak of a few shortish but crucial lines of new Twitter backend code to a developers' messageboard did not generate much more debate and outrage than it did.



The code, to those who know how to read such things, appears to pave the way for a technical and commercial partnership between Twitter and Google's in-development micropayments system, with deductions theoretically able to be made from users' Google Checkout accounts on a per tweet basis. Even at a likely cost of a tiny fraction of a cent per tweet, it's stunning stuff, when you think about it, and a move that would undoubtedly change the very way we use social media and other online communications services. Everyone expects Twitter to make money somehow, but few would have predicted that they'd charge users directly.



Twitter moved quickly, lawyering away quietly in the background to remove the offending (and alleged) code from the original messageboard, and has been playing a futile game of catch-up in recent days to stamp out any republishing of the material.



While a potential user-pays Twitter is shocking enough, much more concerning was a loophole in the code -- inserted deliberately or overlooked accidentally -- that makes it possible for Twitter to dynamically alter the price charged per tweet on the basis of the tweet's content. Obviously, there was nothing in the code that made clear what criteria might be used to determine which tweets cost more or less, but it's impossible to count the ways in which such a mechanism could compromise the openness and basic objectivity of the Twitter platform, instead building-in bias determined by faceless employees of an unaccountable company.



All of this is theoretical right now -- Twitter has not formally announced any micropayment plans and both Twitter and Google have outright denied any knowledge of such a plan when questioned this past week, despite the released code quite explicitly linking both companies. But given so many of us rely on Twitter and other online services for so much of our day-to-day personal and business lives, paying nothing but expecting everything in return, perhaps this is just the wake-up call we needed to make us think about how these services may in the future be compromised and how we might be forced to suddenly alter the way we use communication technologies.
