Although his foundation was long a clearinghouse for many of the numbers describing campaign finances, Dr. Alexander’s descriptions and explanations were often just as compelling.

In the book about the 1960 election, for example, he said one reason campaign costs were rising was staff expenses, and he mentioned some of the members of the staff of Senator John F. Kennedy. He said they included a speech professor to teach Kennedy voice control and a psychologist to evaluate the response of crowds.

Dr. Alexander also cited some fund-raising innovations introduced in that election cycle, including Michigan State students’ selling their blood to swell a campaign chest and a Kennedy-for-president club in Syracuse giving trading stamps in return for campaign contributions at the rate of 10 stamps per dollar.

In the first sentence of the book, Dr. Alexander quoted  <quote> “a British campaign agent” </quote>  from  <quote> “many years ago” </quote>  to explain the seemingly endless escalation in election expenses:  <quote> “A defeat is the most expensive of all contests.” </quote> 

As an example of this thinking, he mentioned a telethon by Kennedy’s Republican opponent, Vice President Richard M. Nixon, the day before the election, which cost more than $200,000 for air time alone. He presumed it was  <quote> “based on strategic considerations probably determined without much regard to cost.” </quote> 

For all his scrupulous financial record-keeping, Dr. Alexander did not think elections cost too much money. He thought they cost too little, given their importance.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In 2000, he testified to a Senate committee that the two leading commercial advertisers, Procter & Gamble and General Motors, together spent more on advertising in 1996 than was spent on all the elections at every level in the United States that year.

Herbert Ephraim Alexander was born in Waterbury, Conn., on Dec. 21, 1927. He graduated from the University of North Carolina with a major in political science and earned a master’s degree from the University of Connecticut. He earned a doctorate from Yale in 1958. In addition to his work at Princeton and U.S.C., he briefly taught at Yale and the University of Pennsylvania.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In 1961-2, Dr. Alexander was executive director of the President’s Commission on Campaign Costs and then consulted on legislation based on the commission’s report. After the assassination of President Kennedy, President Lyndon B. Johnson did not push the proposals and few became law.

In the wake of Watergate, when the Democratic National Committee and Common Cause were suing the Republicans over $10 million in campaign money that was not accounted for, Dr. Alexander was the source of financial data.

After the 1976 election, Dr. Alexander’s analysis showed that reforms in the party finance system had helped Jimmy Carter win the presidency. Under the old system, he said, both Senator Henry M. Jackson, Democrat of Washington, and Representative Morris K. Udall, Democrat of Arizona, would most likely have raised considerably more money than Mr. Carter.

Dr. Alexander advised numerous federal, state and local election agencies, including the New York City Charter Revision Commission on setting up a public finance system for city campaigns. As chairman of the International Political Science Association’s research committee on political finance and political corruption, he edited two books comparing the American campaign finance system and the systems of other countries.

Dr. Alexander’s wife, Nancy, died in December 2000. He is survived by his sons, Michael, of East Windsor, N.J., Andrew, of Toronto, and Kenneth, of Olney, Md.; five grandchildren; and his companion, Barbara B. Seidel.

Before public disclosure of campaign contributions was required, Dr. Alexander often provided the only trusted estimate. But even he sometimes failed, as in 1970 when he wrote the chief political lieutenant of Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York to ask if he could stop by to discuss finances.

The letter was returned to him with a message scrawled on the bottom:  <quote> “Don’t bother.” </quote> 